Cornell University
Student Health Plan 
Certificate of Coverage 
2024-2025


New York Student Health Plan
This is Your
CERTIFICATE OF COVERAGE 
Issued by
Cornell University 
This Certificate of Coverage (“Certificate”) explains the benefits available to You under a 
Contract between Cornell University (hereinafter referred to as “We”, “Us” or “Our”) and 
You.  Amendments, riders or endorsements may be delivered with the Certificate or 
added thereafter.  
You have the right to return this Certificate. Examine it carefully.  If You are not 
satisfied, You may return this Certificate to Us and ask Us to cancel it.  Your request 
must be made in writing within ten (10) days from the date You receive this Certificate. 
We will refund any Premium paid including any Certificate fees or other charges. 
This Certificate offers You the option to receive Covered Services on two benefit levels: 
1. In-Network Benefits. In-network benefits are the highest level of coverage
available.  In-network benefits apply when Your care is provided by Participating
Providers in Our Aetna Student Health Network and Participating Pharmacies in
Our OptumRX Network.  You should always consider receiving health care
services first through the in-network benefits portion of this Certificate.
2. Out-of-Network Benefits. The out-of-network benefits portion of this Certificate
provides coverage when You receive Covered Services from Non-Participating
Providers.  Your out-of-pocket expenses will be higher when You receive out-of-
network benefits.  In addition to Cost-Sharing, You will also be responsible for
paying any difference between the Allowed Amount and the Non-Participating
Provider’s charge.
READ THIS ENTIRE CERTIFICATE CAREFULLY.  IT DESCRIBES THE 
BENEFITS AVAILABLE UNDER THE CONTRACT.  IT IS YOUR RESPONSIBILITY 
TO UNDERSTAND THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS IN THIS CERTIFICATE.
This Certificate is governed by the laws of New York State. 
Christopher J. Cowen
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Cornell University 
If You need foreign language assistance to understand this Certificate, You may call Us 
at the number on Your ID card. 
CU2425-01
2
CU2425-01
2
G/L Code :
OU :
Cost :
Department:
        APPROVED
STATE OF NEW YORK
              APPROVED
     STATE OF NEW YORK
             APPROVED
     STATE OF NEW YORK
Date:
       SUPERINTENDENT
    BENJAMIN M. LAWSKY
NYS DEPARTMENT OF 
 
NYS DEPARTMENT OF
 FINANCIAL SERVICES
SHIRIN EMAMI
SHIRIN EMAMI
ACTING SUPERINTENDENT
SHIRIN EMAMI
Maria T. Vullo
MARIA T. VULLO
LINDA A. LACEWELL
SUPERINTENDENT
ADRIENNE A. HARRIS
06/04/2024


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Section I.  Definitions ................................................................................................. 04 
Section II.  How Your Coverage Works .................................................................... 11 
Participating Providers  ................................................................................................ 11 
The Role of Primary Care Physicians ........................................................................... 12 
Services Subject to Preauthorization............................................................................ 12 
Medical Necessity ........................................................................................................ 13 
Important Telephone Numbers and Addresses  ........................................................... 16 
Section III.  Access to Care and Transitional Care  ................................................. 17 
Section IV.  Cost-Sharing Expenses and Allowed Amount .................................... 19 
Section V.  Who is Covered ....................................................................................... 23 
Section VI.  Preventive Care ...................................................................................... 27 
Section VII.  Ambulance and Pre-Hospital Emergency Medical Services ............. 31 
Section VIII.  Emergency Services and Urgent Care ............................................... 33 
Section IX.  Outpatient and Professional Services .................................................. 35 
Section X.  Additional Benefits, Equipment and Devices ....................................... 45 
Section XI.  Inpatient Services .................................................................................. 49 
Section XII.  Mental Health Care and Substance Use Services .............................. 53 
Section XIII.  Prescription Drug Coverage ............................................................... 58 
Section XIV.  Wellness Benefits ................................................................................ 70 
Section XV.  Pediatric Vision Care ............................................................................ 71 
Section XVI.  Pediatric Dental Care ........................................................................... 72 
Section XVII.  Exclusions and Limitations ............................................................... 74 
Section XVIII.  Claim Determinations ........................................................................ 77 
Section XIX.  Grievance Procedures ......................................................................... 79 
Section XX.  Utilization Review  ................................................................................ 81 
Section XXI.  External Appeal ................................................................................... 90 
Section XXII.  Termination of Coverage ................................................................... 95 
Section XXIII.  Extension of Benefits ........................................................................ 97 
Section XXIV.  Continuation of Coverage ................................................................ 98 
Section XXV.  Temporary Suspension Rights for Armed Forces’ Members ......... 99 
Section XXVI.  General Provisions............................................................................ 100 
Section XXVII. Other Covered Services .................................................................... 107 
Section XXVIII.  Schedule of Benefits ....................................................................... 109 
CU2425-01
3


SECTION I 
Definitions 
Defined terms will appear capitalized throughout this Certificate. 
Acute:  The onset of disease or injury, or a change in the Member's condition that 
would require prompt medical attention. 
Allowed Amount:  The maximum amount on which Our payment is based for Covered 
Services.  See the Cost-Sharing Expenses and Allowed Amount section of this 
Certificate for a description of how the Allowed Amount is calculated.  If Your Non-
Participating Provider charges more than the Allowed Amount, You will have to pay the 
difference between the Allowed Amount and the Provider’s charge, in addition to any 
Cost-Sharing requirements. 
Ambulatory Surgical Center:  A Facility currently licensed by the appropriate state 
regulatory agency for the provision of surgical and related medical services on an 
outpatient basis. 
Appeal:  A request for Us to review a Utilization Review decision or a Grievance again.   
Balance Billing:  When a Non-Participating Provider bills You for the difference 
between the Non-Participating Provider’s charge and the Allowed Amount.  A 
Participating Provider may not Balance Bill You for Covered Services.   
Certificate:  This Certificate issued by Cornell University, including the Schedule of 
Benefits and any attached riders. 
Child, Children:  The Student’s Children, including any natural, adopted or step-
children, unmarried disabled Children, newborn Children, or any other Children as 
described in the Who is Covered section of this Certificate. 
Coinsurance:  Your share of the costs of a Covered Service, calculated as a percent of 
the Allowed Amount for the service that You are required to pay to a Provider.  The 
amount can vary by the type of Covered Service.  
Copayment:  A fixed amount You pay directly to a Provider for a Covered Service when 
You receive the service.  The amount can vary by the type of Covered Service. 
Cost-Sharing:  Amounts You must pay for Covered Services, expressed as 
Copayments, Deductibles and/or Coinsurance. 
Cover, Covered or Covered Services:  The Medically Necessary services paid for, 
arranged, or authorized for You by Us under the terms and conditions of this Certificate. 
CU2425-01
4


Deductible:  The amount You owe before We begin to pay for Covered Services.  The 
Deductible applies before any Copayments or Coinsurance are applied.  The Deductible 
may not apply to all Covered Services.  You may also have a Deductible that applies to 
a specific Covered Service (e.g., a Prescription Drug Deductible) that You owe before 
We begin to pay for a particular Covered Service. 
Dependents:  The Student’s Spouse and Children.  
Durable Medical Equipment (“DME”):  Equipment which is: 
•
Designed and intended for repeated use;
•
Primarily and customarily used to serve a medical purpose;
•
Generally not useful to a person in the absence of disease or injury; and
•
Appropriate for use in the home.
Emergency Condition:  A medical or behavioral condition that manifests itself by Acute 
symptoms of sufficient severity, including severe pain, such that a prudent layperson, 
possessing an average knowledge of medicine and health, could reasonably expect the 
absence of immediate medical attention to result in:  
•
Placing the health of the person afflicted with such condition or, with respect to a
pregnant woman, the health of the woman or her unborn child in serious
jeopardy, or in the case of a behavioral condition, placing the health of such
person or others in serious jeopardy;
•
Serious impairment to such person’s bodily functions;
•
Serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part of such person; or
•
Serious disfigurement of such person.
Emergency Department Care:  Emergency Services You get in a Hospital emergency 
department.   
Emergency Services:  A medical screening examination which is within the capability 
of the emergency department of a Hospital, including ancillary services routinely 
available to the emergency department to evaluate such Emergency Condition; and 
within the capabilities of the staff and facilities available at the Hospital, such further 
medical examination and treatment as are required to stabilize the patient.  “To 
stabilize” is to provide such medical treatment of an Emergency Condition as may be 
necessary to assure that, within reasonable medical probability, no material 
deterioration of the condition is likely to result from or occur during the transfer of the 
patient from a Facility, or to deliver a newborn child (including the placenta).     
Exclusions:  Health care services that We do not pay for or Cover. 
External Appeal Agent:  An entity that has been certified by the New York State 
Department of Financial Services to perform external appeals in accordance with New 
York law. 
CU2425-01
5


Facility:  A Hospital; Ambulatory Surgical Center; birthing center; dialysis center; 
rehabilitation Facility; Skilled Nursing Facility; hospice; Home Health Agency or home 
care services agency certified or licensed under New York Public Health Law Article 36; 
a comprehensive care center for eating disorders pursuant to New York Mental Hygiene 
Law Article 30;  and a Facility defined in New York Mental Hygiene Law Section 1.03, 
certified by the New York State Office of Addiction Services and Supports, or certified 
under New York Public Health Law Article 28 (or, in other states, a similarly licensed or 
certified Facility).  If You receive treatment for substance use disorder outside of New 
York State, a Facility also includes one which is accredited by the Joint Commission to 
provide a substance use disorder treatment program. 
Grievance:  A complaint that You communicate to Us that does not involve a Utilization 
Review determination.   
Habilitation Services:  Health care services that help a person keep, learn or improve 
skills and functioning for daily living.  Habilitation Services include the management of 
limitations and disabilities, including services or programs that help maintain or prevent 
deterioration in physical, cognitive, or behavioral function.  These services consist of 
physical therapy, occupational therapy and speech therapy. 
Health Care Professional:  An appropriately licensed, registered or certified  
Physician; dentist; optometrist; chiropractor; psychologist; social worker; podiatrist; 
physical therapist; occupational therapist; midwife; speech-language pathologist; 
audiologist; pharmacist; behavior analyst; nurse practitioner; or any other licensed, 
registered or certified Health Care Professional under Title 8 of the New York Education 
Law (or other comparable state law, if applicable) that the New York Insurance Law 
requires to be recognized who charges and bills patients for Covered Services.  The 
Health Care Professional’s services must be rendered within the lawful scope of 
practice for that type of Provider in order to be covered under this Certificate. 
Home Health Agency:  An organization currently certified or licensed by the State of 
New York or the state in which it operates and renders home health care services.   
Hospice Care:  Care to provide comfort and support for persons in the last stages of a 
terminal illness and their families that are provided by a hospice organization certified 
pursuant to New York Public Health Law Article 40 or under a similar certification 
process required by the state in which the hospice organization is located.   
Hospital:  A short term, acute, general Hospital, which: 
•
Is primarily engaged in providing, by or under the continuous supervision of
Physicians, to patients, diagnostic services and therapeutic services for
diagnosis, treatment and care of injured or sick persons;
•
Has organized departments of medicine and major surgery;
•
Has a requirement that every patient must be under the care of a Physician or
dentist;
CU2425-01
6


•
Provides 24-hour nursing service by or under the supervision of a registered
professional nurse (R.N.);
•
If located in New York State, has in effect a Hospitalization review plan
applicable to all patients which meets at least the standards set forth in 42 U.S.C.
Section 1395x(k);
•
Is duly licensed by the agency responsible for licensing such Hospitals; and
•
Is not, other than incidentally, a place of rest, a place primarily for the treatment
of tuberculosis, a place for the aged, a place for drug addicts, alcoholics, or a
place for convalescent, custodial, educational, or rehabilitory care.
Hospital does not mean health resorts, spas, or infirmaries at schools or camps. 
Hospitalization:  Care in a Hospital that requires admission as an inpatient and usually 
requires an overnight stay.   
Hospital Outpatient Care:  Care in a Hospital that usually doesn’t require an overnight 
stay.   
In-Network Coinsurance:  Your share of the costs of a Covered Service, calculated as 
a percent of the Allowed Amount for the Covered Service that You are required to pay 
to a Participating Provider.  The amount can vary by the type of Covered Service. 
In-Network Copayment:  A fixed amount You pay directly to a Participating Provider  
for a Covered Service when You receive the service.  The amount can vary by the type 
of Covered Service. 
In-Network Cost-Sharing:  Amounts You must pay to a Participating Provider for 
Covered Services, expressed as Copayments, and/or Coinsurance.  
In-Network Out-of-Pocket Limit:  The most You pay during a Plan Year in Cost-
Sharing before We begin to pay 100% of the Allowed Amount for Covered Services 
received from Participating Providers.  This limit never includes Your Premium or 
services We do not Cover. 
Medically Necessary:  See the How Your Coverage Works section of this Certificate 
for the definition. 
Medicare:  Title XVIII of the Social Security Act, as amended. 
Member:  The Student or a covered Dependent for whom required Premiums have 
been paid.  Whenever a Member is required to provide a notice pursuant to a Grievance 
or emergency department visit or admission, “Member” also means the Member’s 
designee. 
Network:  The Providers We have contracted with to provide health care services to 
You.  
CU2425-01
7


Non-Participating Provider:  A Provider who doesn’t have a contract with Us to 
provide services to You.  You will pay more to see a Non-Participating Provider. 
Out-of-Network Coinsurance:  Your share of the costs of a Covered Service 
calculated as a percent of the Allowed Amount for the service that You are required to 
pay to a Non-Participating Provider.  The amount can vary by the type of Covered 
Service.  
Out-of-Network Copayment:  A fixed amount You pay directly to a Non-Participating 
Provider for a Covered Service when You receive the service.  The amount can vary by 
the type of Covered Service. 
Out-of-Network Cost-Sharing:  Amounts You must pay to a Non-Participating Provider 
for Covered Services, expressed as Copayments, Deductibles and/or Coinsurance.  
Out-of-Network Deductible:  The amount You owe before We begin to pay for 
Covered Services received from Non-Participating Providers.  The Out-of-Network 
Deductible applies before any Copayments or Coinsurance are applied.  The Out-of-
Network Deductible may not apply to all Covered Services.  You may also have an Out-
of-Network Deductible that applies to a specific Covered Service (e.g., a Prescription 
Drug Deductible) that You owe before We begin to pay for a particular Covered Service. 
Out-of-Network Out-of-Pocket Limit:  The most You pay during a Plan Year in Cost-
Sharing before We begin to pay 100% of the Allowed Amount for Covered Services 
received from Non-Participating Providers.  This limit never includes Your Premium, 
Balance Billing charges or services We do not Cover.  You are also responsible for all 
differences, if any, between the Allowed Amount and the Non-Participating Provider's 
charge for out-of-network services regardless of whether the Out-of-Pocket Limit has 
been met. 
Out-of-Pocket Limit:  The most You pay during a Plan Year in Cost-Sharing before We 
begin to pay 100% of the Allowed Amount for Covered Services.  This limit never 
includes Your Premium, Balance Billing charges or the cost of health care services We 
do not Cover.   
Participating Provider:  A Provider who has a contract with Us to provide health care 
services to You.  A list of Participating Providers and their locations is available on Our 
website at www.aetnastudenthealth.com or upon Your request to Us.  The list will be 
revised from time to time by Us. 
Physician or Physician Services:  Health care services a licensed medical Physician 
(M.D. – Medical Doctor or D.O. – Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine) provides or 
coordinates.    
Plan Year:  The 12-month period beginning on the effective date of the Contract or any 
anniversary date thereafter, during which the Certificate is in effect. 
CU2425-01
8


Preauthorization:  A decision by Us prior to Your receipt of a Covered Service, 
procedure, treatment plan, device, or Prescription Drug that the Covered Service, 
procedure, treatment plan, device or Prescription Drug is Medically Necessary.  We 
indicate which Covered Services require Preauthorization in the Schedule of Benefits 
section of this Certificate. 
Premium:  The amount that must be paid for Your health insurance coverage. 
Prescription Drugs:  A medication, product or device that has been approved by the 
Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) and that can, under federal or state law, be 
dispensed only pursuant to a prescription order or refill and is on Our formulary.  A 
Prescription Drug includes a medication that, due to its characteristics, is appropriate for 
self administration or administration by a non-skilled caregiver.   
Primary Care Physician (“PCP”):  A participating nurse practitioner, physician 
assistant, or Physician who typically is an internal medicine, family practice or pediatric 
Physician and who directly provides or coordinates a range of health care services for 
You.     
Provider:  A Physician, Health Care Professional or Facility licensed, registered, 
certified or accredited as required by state law.  A Provider also includes a vendor or 
dispenser of diabetic equipment and supplies, durable medical equipment, medical 
supplies, or any other equipment or supplies that are Covered under this Certificate that 
is licensed, registered, certified or accredited as required by state law.  
Referral:  An authorization given to one Participating Provider from another 
Participating Provider (usually from a PCP to a participating Specialist), in order to 
arrange for additional care for a Member.  A Referral can be transmitted electronically or 
by Your Provider completing a paper Referral form.  Except as provided in the Access 
to Care and Transitional Care section of this Certificate, a Referral will not be made to a 
Non-Participating Provider.  
Rehabilitation Services:  Health care services that help a person keep, get back, or 
improve skills and functioning for daily living that have been lost or impaired because a 
person was sick, hurt, or disabled.  These services consist of physical therapy, 
occupational therapy, and speech therapy in an inpatient and/or outpatient setting.   
Schedule of Benefits:  The section of this Certificate that describes the Copayments, 
Deductibles, Coinsurance, Out-of-Pocket Limits, Preauthorization requirements, and 
other limits on Covered Services. 
Service Area:  The geographical area, designated by Us and approved by the State of 
New York, in which We provide coverage.  Our Service Area consists of all 62 counties 
in New York State. 
CU2425-01
9


Skilled Nursing Facility:  An institution or a distinct part of an institution that is: 
currently licensed or approved under state or local law; primarily engaged in providing 
skilled nursing care and related services as a Skilled Nursing Facility, extended care 
Facility, or nursing care Facility approved by the Joint Commission or the Bureau of 
Hospitals of the American Osteopathic Association, or as a Skilled Nursing Facility 
under Medicare; or as otherwise determined by Us to meet the standards of any of 
these authorities. 
Specialist:  A Physician who focuses on a specific area of medicine or a group of 
patients to diagnose, manage, prevent or treat certain types of symptoms and 
conditions.  
Spouse:  The person to whom the Student is legally married, including a same sex 
Spouse. Spouse also includes a domestic partner. 
Student:  The person to whom this Certificate is issued.   
Student Health Services:  Any organization, facility, or clinic, operated, maintained, or 
supported by the school which provides health care services to a Student and adult 
Dependents and has received accreditation by either the Accreditation Association of 
Ambulatory Health Care (AAAHC) or the Joint Commission for the ambulatory health 
care provided within their student health services. Cornell Health serves as Student 
Health Services for the Ithaca campus. Weill Cornell Student Health Services serves at 
Student Health Services for the Weill Cornell Medical campus. 
UCR (Usual, Customary and Reasonable):  The amount paid for a medical service in 
a geographic area based on what Providers in the area usually charge for the same or 
similar medical service.   
Urgent Care:  Medical care for an illness, injury or condition serious enough that a 
reasonable person would seek care right away, but not so severe as to require 
Emergency Department Care.  Urgent Care may be rendered in a Physician's office or 
Urgent Care Center.   
Urgent Care Center:  A licensed Facility that provides Urgent Care. 
Us, We, Our:  Cornell University and anyone to whom We legally delegate 
performance, on Our behalf, under this Certificate. 
Utilization Review:  The review to determine whether services are or were Medically 
Necessary or experimental or investigational (i.e., treatment for a rare disease or a 
clinical trial).       
You, Your:  The Member. 
CU2425-01
10


SECTION II 
 
How Your Coverage Works 
 
A.  Your Coverage Under this Certificate.   
We will provide the benefits described in this Certificate to covered Members of Cornell 
University and Weill Cornell Medicine, that is, to a Student and their Covered 
Dependents.  You should keep this Certificate with Your other important papers so that 
it is available for Your future reference. 
 
B.  Covered Services.   
You will receive Covered Services under the terms and conditions of this Certificate only 
when the Covered Service is:    
• Medically Necessary; 
• Provided by a Participating Provider for in-network coverage; 
• Listed as a Covered Service; 
• Not in excess of any benefit limitations described in the Schedule of Benefits 
section of this Certificate; and  
• Received while Your Certificate is in force.   
 
C.  Participating Providers.   
To find out if a Provider is a Participating Provider: 
• Check Our Provider directory, available at Your request; 
• Call the number on Your ID card; or 
• Visit Our website www.aetnastudenthealth.com or www.optumrx.com. 
 
The Provider directory will give You the following information about Our Participating 
Providers: 
• Name, address, and telephone number; 
• Specialty; 
• Board certification (if applicable); 
• Languages spoken; and 
• Whether the Participating Provider is accepting new patients.  
 
You are only responsible for any In-Network Cost-Sharing that would apply to the 
Covered Services if You receive Covered Services from a Provider who is not a 
Participating Provider in the following situations:   
• The Provider is listed as a Participating Provider in Our online Provider directory; 
• Our paper Provider directory listing the Provider as a Participating Provider is 
incorrect as of the date of publication;  
• We give You written notice that the Provider is a Participating Provider in 
response to Your telephone request for network status information about the 
Provider; or  
• We do not provide You with a written notice within one business day of Your 
telephone request for network status information. 
In these situations, if a Provider bills You for more than Your In-Network Cost-Sharing 
and You pay the bill, You are entitled to a refund from the Provider, plus interest.  
CU2425-01
11


D. The Role of Primary Care Physicians.
This Certificate does not have a gatekeeper, usually known as a Primary Care
Physician (“PCP”).  Although You are encouraged to receive care from Your PCP, You
do not need a Referral from Student Health Services or a PCP before receiving
Specialist care.
E. Access to Providers and Changing Providers.
Sometimes Providers in Our Provider directory are not available.  You should call the
Provider to make sure they are a Participating Provider and is accepting new patients.
To see a Provider, call their office and tell the Provider that You are a Cornell University 
Student Health Plan and Aetna Member, and explain the reason for Your visit.  Have 
Your ID card available.  The Provider’s office may ask You for Your Member ID number.  
When You go to the Provider’s office, bring Your ID card with You. 
To contact Your Provider after normal business hours, call the Provider’s office.  You 
will be directed to Your provider, an answering machine with directions on how to obtain 
services, or another Provider.  If You have an Emergency Condition, seek immediate 
care at the nearest Hospital emergency department or call 911. 
If We do not have a Participating Provider for certain provider types in the county in 
which You live or in a bordering county that is within approved time and distance 
standards, We will approve an authorization to a specific Non-Participating Provider 
until You no longer need the care or We have a Participating Provider in Our Network 
that meets the time and distance standards and Your care has been transitioned to that 
Participating Provider.  Covered Services rendered by the Non-Participating Provider 
will be paid as if they were provided by a Participating Provider.  You will be responsible 
only for any applicable In-Network Cost-Sharing. 
F. Out-of-Network Services.
We Cover the services of Non-Participating Providers.  See the Schedule of Benefits
section of this Certificate for the Non-Participating Provider services that are Covered.
In any case where benefits are limited to a certain number of days or visits, such limits
apply in the aggregate to in-network and out-of-network services.
G. Care Outside the United States.
Claims incurred outside the United States will be reimbursed at the Participating
Provider level.
H. Services Subject to Preauthorization.
Our Preauthorization is required before You receive certain Covered Services.  Student
Health Services or Your Participating Provider is responsible for requesting
Preauthorization for in-network services and You are responsible for requesting
Preauthorization for the out-of-network services listed in the Schedule of Benefits
section of this Certificate.
CU2425-01
12


I.  Preauthorization Procedure. 
If You seek coverage for out-of-network services that require Preauthorization, You 
must call Us at the number on Your ID card.   
 
You must contact Us to request Preauthorization as follows: 
• At least two (2) weeks prior to a planned admission or surgery when Your 
Provider recommends inpatient Hospitalization.  If that is not possible, then as 
soon as reasonably possible during regular business hours prior to the 
admission.   
• Before air ambulance services are rendered for a non-Emergency Condition. 
 
After receiving a request for approval, We will review the reasons for Your planned 
treatment and determine if benefits are available.  Criteria will be based on multiple 
sources which may include medical policy, clinical guidelines, and pharmacy and 
therapeutic guidelines. 
 
J.  Medical Management.   
The benefits available to You under this Certificate are subject to pre-service, 
concurrent and retrospective reviews to determine when services should be Covered by 
Us.  The purpose of these reviews is to promote the delivery of cost-effective medical 
care by reviewing the use of procedures and, where appropriate, the setting or place 
the services are performed.  Covered Services must be Medically Necessary for 
benefits to be provided.  
 
K.  Medical Necessity.   
We Cover benefits described in this Certificate as long as the health care service, 
procedure, treatment, test, device, Prescription Drug or supply (collectively, “service”) 
is Medically Necessary.  The fact that a Provider has furnished, prescribed, ordered, 
recommended, or approved the service does not make it Medically Necessary or mean 
that We have to Cover it. 
 
We may base Our decision on a review of:   
• Your medical records; 
• Our medical policies and clinical guidelines; 
• Medical opinions of a professional society, peer review committee or other 
groups of Physicians;  
• Reports in peer-reviewed medical literature;  
• Reports and guidelines published by nationally recognized health care 
organizations that include supporting scientific data; 
• Professional standards of safety and effectiveness, which are generally 
recognized in the United States for diagnosis, care, or treatment; 
• The opinion of Health Care Professionals in the generally recognized health 
specialty involved; 
• The opinion of the attending Providers, which have credence but do not overrule 
contrary opinions. 
 
CU2425-01
13


Services will be deemed Medically Necessary only if: 
•
They are clinically appropriate in terms of type, frequency, extent, site, and
duration, and considered effective for Your illness, injury, or disease;
•
They are required for the direct care and treatment or management of that
condition;
•
Your condition would be adversely affected if the services were not provided;
•
They are provided in accordance with generally accepted standards of medical
practice;
•
They are not primarily for the convenience of You, Your family, or Your Provider;
•
They are not more costly than an alternative service or sequence of services,
that is at least as likely to produce equivalent therapeutic or diagnostic results;
•
When setting or place of service is part of the review, services that can be safely
provided to You in a lower cost setting will not be Medically Necessary if they are
performed in a higher cost setting.  For example, We will not provide coverage
for an inpatient admission for surgery if the surgery could have been performed
on an outpatient basis or an infusion or injection of a specialty drug provided in
the outpatient department of a Hospital if the drug could be provided in a
Physician’s office or the home setting.
See the Utilization Review and External Appeal sections of this Certificate for Your right 
to an internal Appeal and external appeal of Our determination that a service is not 
Medically Necessary. 
L. Protection from Surprise Bills.
1. Surprise Bills.  A surprise bill is a bill You receive for Covered Services in the
following circumstances:
•
For services performed by a non-participating Provider at a participating
Hospital or Ambulatory Surgical Center, when:
o
A participating Provider is unavailable at the time the health care services
are performed;
o
A non-participating Provider performs services without Your knowledge; or
o
Unforeseen medical issues or services arise at the time the health care
services are performed.
A surprise bill does not include a bill for health care services when a participating 
Provider is available and You elected to receive services from a non-participating 
Provider. 
•
You were referred by a participating Physician to a Non-Participating Provider
without Your explicit written consent acknowledging that the referral is to a
Non-Participating Provider and it may result in costs not covered by Us.  For
a surprise bill, a referral to a Non-Participating Provider means:
o
Covered Services are performed by a Non-Participating Provider in the
participating Physician’s office or practice during the same visit;
o
The participating Physician sends a specimen taken from You in the
participating Physician’s office to a non-participating laboratory or
pathologist; or
CU2425-01
14


o For any other Covered Services performed by a Non-Participating 
Provider at the participating Physician’s request, when Referrals are 
required under Your Certificate.  
 
You will be held harmless for any Non-Participating Provider charges for the 
surprise bill that exceed Your In-Network Cost-Sharing.  The Non-Participating 
Provider may only bill You for Your In-Network Cost-Sharing.  You can sign a 
form to notify Us and the Non-Participating Provider that You received a surprise 
bill.   
 
The form for surprise bills is available at www.dfs.ny.gov or You can visit Our 
website at www.aetnastudenthealth.com for a copy of the form.  You need to 
mail a copy of the form to Us at the address on Your ID card and to Your 
Provider.  
 
2. Independent Dispute Resolution Process.  Either We or a Provider may 
submit a dispute involving a surprise bill to an independent dispute resolution 
entity (“IDRE”) assigned by the state.  The IDRE will determine whether Our 
payment or the Provider’s charge is reasonable within 30 days of receiving the 
dispute.   
 
M.  Delivery of Covered Services Using Telehealth. 
If Your Participating Provider offers Covered Services using telehealth, We will not deny 
the Covered Services because they are delivered using telehealth.  Covered Services 
delivered using telehealth may be subject to utilization review and quality assurance 
requirements and other terms and conditions of the Certificate that are at least as 
favorable as those requirements for the same service when not delivered using 
telehealth.  “Telehealth” means the use of electronic information and communication 
technologies, including telephone or video using smart phones or other devices, by a 
Participating Provider to deliver Covered Services to You while Your location is different 
than Your Provider’s location. 
 
N.  Case Management. 
Case management helps coordinate services for Members with health care needs due 
to serious, complex, and/or chronic health conditions.  Our programs coordinate 
benefits and educate Members who agree to take part in the care management 
program to help meet their health-related needs. 
 
Our case management programs are confidential and voluntary.  These programs are 
given at no extra cost to You and do not change Covered Services.  If You meet 
program criteria and agree to take part, We will help You meet Your identified health 
care needs.  This is reached through contact and teamwork with You and/or Your 
authorized representative, treating Physician(s), and other Providers.  In addition, We 
may assist in coordinating care with existing community-based programs and services 
to meet Your needs, which may include giving You information about external agencies 
and community-based programs and services. 
 
CU2425-01
15


In certain cases of severe or chronic illness or injury, We may provide benefits for 
alternate care through Our case management program that is not listed as a Covered 
Service.   We may also extend Covered Services beyond the benefit maximums of this 
Certificate.  We will make Our decision on a case-by-case basis if We determine the 
alternate or extended benefit is in the best interest of You and Us.   
Nothing in this provision shall prevent You from appealing Our decision.  A decision to 
provide extended benefits or approve alternate care in one case does not obligate Us 
to provide the same benefits again to You or to any other Member.  We reserve the 
right, at any time, to alter or stop providing extended benefits or approving alternate 
care.  In such case, We will notify You or Your representative in writing. 
O. Important Telephone Numbers and Addresses.
•
MEDICAL CLAIMS
Aetna Student Health
PO Box 981106
El Paso, TX 79998
www.aetnastudenthealth.com
PHARMACY CLAIMS 
OptumRx Claims Department 
PO Box 650629 
Dallas, TX 75265-0629 
www.optumrx.com  
•
COMPLAINTS, GRIEVANCES AND UTILIZATION REVIEW APPEALS
Call the number on Your ID card
•
SURPRISE BILL CERTIFICATION FORM
Refer to the address on Your ID card
•
MEMBER SERVICES
Call the number on Your ID card
(Member Services Representatives are available at all hours.)
•
PREAUTHORIZATION
Call the number on Your ID card
•
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES
Call the number on Your ID card
•
OUR WEBSITE
www.studenthealthbenefits.cornell.edu
CU2425-01
16


SECTION III 
Access to Care and Transitional Care 
A.  Authorization to a Non-Participating Provider.  
If We determine that We do not have a Participating Provider that has the appropriate 
training and experience to treat Your condition, We will approve an authorization to an 
appropriate Non-Participating Provider.  Your Participating Provider or You must 
request prior approval of the authorization to a specific Non-Participating Provider.  
Approvals of authorizations to Non-Participating Providers will not be made for the 
convenience of You or another treating Provider and may not necessarily be to the 
specific Non-Participating Provider You requested.  If We approve the authorization, all 
services performed by the Non-Participating Provider are subject to a treatment plan 
approved by Us in consultation with Your PCP or Student Health Services, the Non-
Participating Provider and You.  Covered Services rendered by the Non-Participating 
Provider will be covered as if they were provided by a Participating Provider.  You will 
be responsible only for any applicable In-Network Cost-Sharing.  In the event an 
authorization is not approved, any services rendered by a Non-Participating Provider 
will be Covered as an out-of-network benefit if available. 
 
B.  When Your Provider Leaves the Network.  
If You are in an ongoing course of treatment when Your Provider leaves Our network, 
then You may continue to receive Covered Services for the ongoing treatment from the 
former Participating Provider for up to 90 days from the date Your Provider’s contractual 
obligation to provide services to You terminates.  If You are pregnant, You may continue 
care with a former Participating Provider through delivery and any postpartum care 
directly related to the delivery. 
 
The Provider must accept as payment the negotiated fee that was in effect just prior to 
the termination of Our relationship with the Provider.  The Provider must also provide Us 
necessary medical information related to Your care and adhere to our policies and 
procedures, including those for assuring quality of care, obtaining Preauthorization, 
authorizations, and a treatment plan approved by Us.  You will receive the Covered 
Services as if they were being provided by a Participating Provider.  You will be 
responsible only for any applicable In-Network Cost-Sharing.  Please note that if the 
Provider was terminated by Us due to fraud, imminent harm to patients or final 
disciplinary action by a state board or agency that impairs the Provider’s ability to 
practice, continued treatment with that Provider is not available. 
    
C.  New Members In a Course of Treatment.  
If You are in an ongoing course of treatment with a Non-Participating Provider when 
Your coverage under this Certificate becomes effective, You may be able to receive 
Covered Services for the ongoing treatment from the Non-Participating Provider for up 
to 60 days from the effective date of Your coverage under this Certificate.  This course 
of treatment must be for a life-threatening disease or condition or a degenerative and 
disabling condition or disease.  You may also continue care with a Non-Participating 
CU2425-01
17


Provider if You are in the second or third trimester of a pregnancy when Your coverage 
under this Certificate becomes effective.  You may continue care through delivery and 
any post-partum services directly related to the delivery. 
In order for You to continue to receive Covered Services for up to 60 days or through 
pregnancy, the Non-Participating Provider must agree to accept as payment Our fees 
for such services.  The Provider must also agree to provide Us necessary medical 
information related to Your care and to adhere to Our policies and procedures including 
those for assuring quality of care, obtaining Preauthorization, authorizations, and a 
treatment plan approved by Us.  If the Provider agrees to these conditions, You will 
receive the Covered Services as if they were being provided by a Participating Provider.  
You will be responsible only for any applicable In-Network Cost-Sharing.  
CU2425-01
18


SECTION IV 
 
Cost-Sharing Expenses and Allowed Amount 
 
A.  Deductible. 
Except where stated otherwise, You must pay the amount in the Schedule of Benefits 
section of this Certificate for Covered out-of-network Services during each Plan Year 
before We provide coverage.  If You have other than individual coverage, the individual 
Deductible applies to each person covered under this Certificate.  Once a person within 
a family meets the individual Deductible, no further Deductible is required for the person 
that has met the individual Deductible for that Plan Year.  However, after Deductible 
payments for persons covered under this Certificate collectively total the family 
Deductible amount in the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate in a Plan Year, 
no further Deductible will be required for any person covered under this Certificate for 
that Plan Year.  
 
Copayments and Coinsurance for in-network services do not apply toward Your Out-of-
Network Deductible.  Any charges of a Non-Participating Provider that are in 
excess of the Allowed Amount do not apply toward the Deductible. 
 
There is no Deductible for Covered In-Network Services under this Certificate during 
each Plan Year. 
 
B. Copayments. 
Except where stated otherwise, after You have satisfied the Deductible as described 
above, You must pay the Copayments, or fixed amounts, in the Schedule of Benefits 
section of this Certificate for Covered in-network and out-of-network Services. However, 
when the Allowed Amount for a service is less than the Copayment, You are 
responsible for the lesser amount. 
 
C. Coinsurance. 
Except where stated otherwise, after You have satisfied the Deductible described 
above, You must pay a percentage of the Allowed Amount for Covered Services. We 
will pay the remaining percentage of the Allowed Amount as Your in-network or out-of-
network benefit as shown in the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate. You 
must also pay any charges of a Non-Participating Provider that are in excess of 
the Allowed Amount. 
 
D.  In-Network Out-of-Pocket Limit.  
When You have met Your In-Network Out-of-Pocket Limit in payment of In-Network 
Cost-Sharing for a Plan Year in the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate, We 
will provide coverage for 100% of the Allowed Amount for Covered in-network Services 
for the remainder of that Plan Year.  If You have other than individual coverage, once a 
person within a family meets the individual In-Network Out-of-Pocket Limit in the 
Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate, We will provide coverage for 100% of 
the Allowed Amount for the rest of that Plan Year for that person. If other than individual 
CU2425-01
19


coverage applies, when persons in the same family covered under this Certificate have 
collectively met the family In-Network Out-of-Pocket Limit in payment of In-Network 
Cost-Sharing for a Plan Year in the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate, We 
will provide coverage for 100% of the Allowed Amount for the rest of that Plan Year for 
the entire family. 
 
Cost-Sharing for out-of-network services, except for Emergency Services, and out-of-
network services approved by Us as an in-network exception, does not apply toward 
Your In-Network Out-of-Pocket Limit. 
 
E.  Out-of-Network Out-of-Pocket Limit.   
This Certificate has a separate Out-of-Network Out-of-Pocket Limit in the Schedule of 
Benefits section of this Certificate for out-of-network benefits.  When You have met Your 
Out-of-Network Out-of-Pocket Limit in payment of Out-of-Network Copayments, 
Deductibles and Coinsurance for a Plan Year in the Schedule of Benefits section of this 
Certificate, We will provide coverage for 100% of the Allowed Amount for Covered out-
of-network Services for the remainder of that Plan Year.  If other than individual 
coverage applies, when persons in the same family covered under this Certificate have 
collectively met the family Out-of-Network Out-of-Pocket Limit in payment of Out-of-
Network Copayments, Deductibles and Coinsurance for a Plan Year in the Schedule of 
Benefits section of this Certificate, We will provide coverage for 100% of the Allowed 
Amount for Covered out-of-network Services for the rest of that Plan Year for the entire 
family.  Any charges of a Non-Participating Provider that are in excess of the 
Allowed Amount do not apply toward Your Out-of-Network Out-of-Pocket Limit. 
 
Cost-Sharing for in-network services does not apply toward Your Out-of-Network Out-
of-Pocket Limit. 
 
F.  Your Additional Payments for Out-of-Network Benefits.   
When You receive Covered Services from a Non-Participating Provider, in addition to 
the applicable Copayments, Deductibles and Coinsurance described in the Schedule of 
Benefits section of this Certificate, You must also pay the amount, if any, by which the 
Non-Participating Provider’s actual charge exceeds Our Allowed Amount.  This means 
that the total of Our coverage and any Cost-Sharing amounts You pay may be less than 
the Non-Participating Provider’s actual charge.   
 
When You receive Covered Services from a Non-Participating Provider, We will apply 
nationally-recognized payment rules to the claim submitted for those services.  These 
rules evaluate the claim information and determine the accuracy of the procedure codes 
and diagnosis codes for the services You received.  Sometimes, applying these rules 
will change the way that We pay for the services.  This does not mean that the services 
were not Medically Necessary.  It only means that the claim should have been 
submitted differently.  For example, Your Provider may have billed using several 
procedure codes when there is a single code that includes all of the separate 
procedures.  We will make one (1) inclusive payment in that case rather than a separate 
payment for each billed code.  Another example of when We will apply the payment 
CU2425-01
20


rules to a claim is when You have surgery that involves two (2) surgeons acting as “co-
surgeons”.  Under the payment rules, the claim from each Provider should have a 
“modifier” on it that identifies it as coming from a co-surgeon.  If We receive a claim that 
does not have the correct modifier, We will change it and make the appropriate 
payment. Additionally, another example of when We will apply a payment rule to a claim 
is when You receive services from a Health Care Professional who is not a Physician, 
such as a physician’s assistant.  Under the payment rule, the Allowed Amount for a 
physician’s assistant or other Health Care Professional who is not a Physician will be 
less than the Allowed Amount for a Physician. 
 
G.  Allowed Amount.   
“Allowed Amount” means the maximum amount We will pay for the services or supplies 
Covered under this Certificate, before any applicable Copayment, Deductible and 
Coinsurance amounts are subtracted.  We determine Our Allowed Amount as follows: 
 
The Allowed Amount for Participating Providers will be the amount We have negotiated 
with the Participating Provider , or the amount approved by Aetna Student Health, or the 
Participating Provider’s charge, if less. 
 
Our payments to Participating Providers may include financial incentives to help 
improve the quality or coordination of care and promote the delivery of Covered 
Services in a cost-efficient manner. Payments under this financial incentive program are 
not made as payment for a specific Covered Service provided to You. Your Cost-
Sharing will not change based on any payments made to or received from Participating 
Providers as part of the financial incentive program. 
 
The Allowed Amount for Non-Participating Providers will be determined as follows: 
 
1. 
Facilities. 
For Facilities, the Allowed Amount will be a rate based on information provided 
by a third party vendor, which may reflect one (1) or more of the following factors: 
1) the complexity or severity of treatment; 2) level of skill and experience required 
for the treatment; or 3) comparable Providers’ fees and costs to deliver care. 
 
Our Allowed Amount for non-participating Facilities equates to approximately 
70% of UCR.  For this purpose, UCR is the FAIR Health rate at the 80th 
percentile. 
 
2.   
For All Other Providers. 
For all other Providers the Allowed Amount will be the Fair Health rate at the 80th 
percentile. 
 
For Durable Medical Equipment, a prosthetic device or implant, if there is no 
code listed or source pricing, the Allowed Amount will be 1.3 times the 
manufacturers’ invoice price. 
 
CU2425-01
21


3.  
Physician-Administered Pharmaceuticals. 
For Physician-administered pharmaceuticals, We use gap methodologies that 
are similar to the pricing methodology used by the Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services, and produce fees based on published acquisition costs or 
average wholesale price for the pharmaceuticals.  These methodologies are 
currently created by Us based on an internally developed pharmaceutical pricing 
resource if the other methodologies have no pricing data available for a 
Physician-administered pharmaceutical or special circumstances support an 
upward adjustment to the other pricing methodology. 
 
The Non-Participating Provider’s actual charge may exceed Our Allowed Amount.  
You must pay the difference between Our Allowed Amount and the Non-
Participating Provider’s charge.  Contact Us at the number on Your ID card for 
information on Your financial responsibility when You receive services from a 
Non-Participating Provider.   
 
See the Emergency Services and Urgent Care section of this Certificate for the Allowed 
Amount for Emergency Services rendered by Non-Participating Providers.  See the 
Ambulance and Pre-Hospital Emergency Medical Services section of this Certificate for 
the Allowed Amount for Pre-Hospital Emergency Medical Services rendered by Non-
Participating Providers.  
 
CU2425-01
22


SECTION V 
 
Who is Covered 
 
A.  Who is Covered Under this Certificate.   
You, the Student to whom this Certificate is issued, are covered under this Certificate.  
Members of Your family may also be covered depending on the type of coverage You 
selected. 
   
B.  Types of Coverage. 
We offer the following types of coverage: 
 
1. Student Coverage.  Students enrolled and registered to a fulltime program (and 
certain eligible part-time students), as defined and reported by the Office of the 
University Registrar at Cornell University or Weill Cornell Medical Registrar, 
including in absentia students, are covered. 
 
    2. Student and Spouse.  If You selected Student and Spouse coverage, then You 
and Your Spouse are covered. 
 
    3. Student and Child/Children.  If You selected Student and child/children 
coverage, then You and Your Child or Children, as described below, are covered.   
 
    4. Student, Spouse, and Children.  If You selected Student, Spouse, and 
Child/Children coverage, then You and Your Spouse and Your Child or Children, 
as described below, are covered.  
 
C.  Children Covered Under this Certificate. 
If You selected Student and Child/Children or Student, Spouse, and Child/Children 
coverage, Children covered under this Certificate include Your natural Children, legally 
adopted Children, step Children, and Children for whom You are the proposed adoptive 
parent without regard to financial dependence, residency with You, student status or 
employment.  A proposed adopted Child is eligible for coverage on the same basis as a 
natural Child during any waiting period prior to the finalization of the Child’s adoption.  
Coverage lasts until the end of the month in which the Child turns 30 years of age. 
Foster Children and grandchildren are not covered. 
 
Any unmarried dependent Child, regardless of age, who is incapable of self-sustaining 
employment by reason of mental illness, developmental disability (as defined in the New 
York Mental Hygiene Law), or physical disability and who became so incapable prior to 
attainment of the age at which the Child’s coverage would otherwise terminate and who 
is chiefly dependent upon You for support and maintenance, will remain covered while 
Your insurance remains in force and Your Child remains in such condition.  You have 
31 days from the date of Your Child's attainment of the termination age to submit an 
application to request that the Child be included in Your coverage and proof of the 
Child’s incapacity.  We have the right to check whether a Child is and continues to 
qualify under this section. 
CU2425-01
23


 
We have the right to request and be furnished with such proof as may be needed to 
determine eligibility status of a prospective or covered Student and all other prospective 
or covered Members in relation to eligibility for coverage under this Certificate at any 
time.  
 
D.  When Coverage Begins. 
Coverage under this Certificate will begin as follows: 
1. If You, the Student, elect coverage before becoming eligible, or within 30 days of 
becoming eligible for other than a special enrollment period, coverage begins on the 
date You become eligible, or on the date determined by Us.  We cannot impose 
waiting periods that exceed 90 days. 
2. If You, the Student, do not elect coverage upon becoming eligible or within 30 days of 
becoming eligible for other than a special enrollment period, and have not provided 
proof of alternate coverage that meets Our waiver criteria (see 
https://studenthealthbenefits.cornell.edu/waive-or-cancel-shp) via the waiver process, 
You are automatically enrolled in the Student Health Plan. 
3. If, You, the Student, do not elect coverage upon becoming eligible or within 30 days of 
becoming eligible for other than a special enrollment period, and have provided 
alternate proof of insurance that meets Our waiver criteria (see 
https://studenthealthbenefits.cornell.edu/waive-or-cancel-shp), You must wait until the 
next open enrollment period to enroll, except as provided below. 
4. For Dependents, You, the Student, must elect dependent coverage by completing a 
dependent enrollment form upon becoming eligible or within 30 days of the plan year 
start date for other than a special enrollment period, You must wait until the next open 
enrollment period to enroll, except as provided below. 
5. If You, the Student, marry while covered, and We receive notice of such marriage and 
any Premium payment within 30 days thereafter, coverage for Your Spouse and Child 
starts on the date of the marriage.  If We do not receive notice within 30 days of the 
marriage, You must wait until the next open enrollment period to add Your Spouse or 
Child. 
6. If You, the Student, have a newborn or adopted newborn Child and We receive notice 
of such birth within 30 days thereafter, coverage for Your newborn starts at the 
moment of birth; otherwise, coverage begins on the date on which We receive notice.  
Your adopted newborn Child will be covered from the moment of birth if You take 
physical custody of the infant as soon as the infant is released from the Hospital after 
birth and You file a petition pursuant to Section 115-c of the New York Domestic 
Relations Law within 30 days of the infant’s birth; and provided further that no notice of 
revocation to the adoption has been filed pursuant to Section 115-b of the New York 
Domestic Relations Law, and consent to the adoption has not been revoked.  
However, We will not provide Hospital benefits for the adopted newborn’s initial 
Hospital stay if one of the infant’s natural parents has coverage for the newborn’s initial 
Hospital stay.  If You have individual or individual and Spouse coverage, You must 
also notify Us of Your desire to switch to parent and child/children or family coverage 
and pay any additional Premium within 30 days of the birth or adoption in order for 
coverage to start at the moment of birth.  Otherwise, coverage begins on the date on 
which We receive notice, provided that You pay any additional Premium when due. 
CU2425-01
24


 
E.  Special Enrollment Periods.   
You, and Your Spouse or Child can also enroll for coverage within 30 days of the loss of 
coverage in another health plan if coverage was terminated because You, Your Spouse 
or Child are no longer eligible for coverage under the other health plan due to:   
1. Termination of employment; 
2. Termination of the other health plan; 
3. Death of the Spouse; 
4. Legal separation, divorce or annulment; 
5. Reduction of hours of employment; 
6. Employer contributions toward a health plan were terminated for You or Your 
Dependent’s Coverage; or 
7. A Child no longer qualifies for coverage as a Child under another health plan. 
 
You, and Your Spouse or Child can also enroll 30 days from exhaustion of Your 
COBRA or continuation coverage or if You gain a Dependent or become a Dependent 
through marriage, birth, adoption or placement for adoption.  
 
We must receive notice and Premium payment within 30 days of one of these events.  
Your coverage will begin on the first day of the following month after We receive Your 
application. If You gain a Dependent or become a Dependent due to a birth, adoption, 
or placement for adoption, Your coverage will begin on the date of the birth, adoption or 
placement for adoption. 
 
In addition, You, and Your Spouse or Child, can also enroll for coverage within 60 days 
of the occurrence of one of the following event: 
1. You or Your Spouse or Child loses eligibility for Medicaid or Child Health Plus; or 
2. You or Your Spouse or Child become eligible for Medicaid or Child Health Plus. 
 
We must receive notice and Premium payment within 60 days of one of these events. 
Your coverage will begin on the first day of the following month after We receive Your 
application.    
 
F.  Domestic Partner Coverage.  
This Certificate covers domestic partners of Students as Spouses.  If You selected 
family coverage, Children covered under this Certificate also include the Children of 
Your domestic partner.  Proof of the domestic partnership and financial 
interdependence must be submitted in the form of:  
 
 
1. Registration as a domestic partnership indicating that neither individual has been 
registered as a member of another domestic partnership within the last six (6) 
months, where such registry exists; or  
2. For partners residing where registration does not exist, by;   
a. An alternative affidavit of domestic partnership. The affidavit must be 
notarized and must contain the following: 
• 
The partners are both 18 years of age or older and are mentally 
competent to consent to contract; 
CU2425-01
25


• 
The partners are not related by blood in a manner that would bar 
marriage under laws of the State of New York; 
• 
The partners have been living together on a continuous basis prior to the 
date of the application;  
• 
Neither individual has been registered as a member of another domestic 
partnership within the last six (6) months; and 
b. Proof of cohabitation (e.g., a driver’s license, tax return or other sufficient 
proof); and  
c. Proof that the partners are financially interdependent.  Two (2) or more of the 
following are collectively sufficient to establish financial interdependence: 
• 
A joint bank account;  
• 
A joint credit card or charge card;  
• 
Joint obligation on a loan; 
• 
Status as an authorized signatory on the partner’s bank account, credit 
card or charge card;  
• 
Joint ownership of holdings or investments;  
• 
Joint ownership of residence;  
• 
Joint ownership of real estate other than residence;  
• 
Listing of both partners as tenants on the lease of the shared residence;  
• 
Shared rental payments of residence (need not be shared 50/50);  
• 
Listing of both partners as tenants on a lease, or shared rental 
payments, for property other than residence;  
• 
A common household and shared household expenses, e.g., grocery 
bills, utility bills, telephone bills, etc. (need not be shared 50/50);  
• 
Shared household budget for purposes of receiving government 
benefits;  
• 
Status of one (1) as representative payee for the other’s government 
benefits;  
• 
Joint ownership of major items of personal property (e.g., appliances, 
furniture);  
• 
Joint ownership of a motor vehicle;  
• 
Joint responsibility for childcare (e.g., school documents, guardianship);  
• 
Shared child-care expenses, e.g., babysitting, day care, school bills 
(need not be shared 50/50);  
• 
Execution of wills naming each other as executor and/or beneficiary;  
• 
Designation as beneficiary under the other’s life insurance policy;  
• 
Designation as beneficiary under the other’s retirement benefits 
account;  
• 
Mutual grant of durable power of attorney;  
• 
Mutual grant of authority to make health care decisions (e.g., health 
care power of attorney);  
• 
Affidavit by creditor or other individual able to testify to partners’ 
financial interdependence; or 
• 
Other item(s) of proof sufficient to establish economic interdependency 
under the circumstances of the particular case. 
CU2425-01
26


SECTION VI 
 
Preventive Care 
 
Please refer to the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate for Cost-Sharing 
requirements, day or visit limits, and any Preauthorization or Referral requirements that 
apply to these benefits.      
 
Preventive Care.   
We Cover the following services for the purpose of promoting good health and early 
detection of disease.  Preventive services are not subject to Cost-Sharing (Copayments, 
Deductibles or Coinsurance) when performed by a Participating Provider and provided 
in accordance with the comprehensive guidelines supported by the Health Resources 
and Services Administration (“HRSA”), or if the items or services have an “A” or “B” 
rating from the United States Preventive Services Task Force (“USPSTF”), or if the 
immunizations are recommended by the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices (“ACIP”).  However, Cost-Sharing may apply to services provided during the 
same visit as the preventive services.  Also, if a preventive service is provided during an 
office visit wherein the preventive service is not the primary purpose of the visit, the 
Cost-Sharing amount that would otherwise apply to the office visit will still apply.   
 
You may contact Us at the number on Your ID card or visit Our website 
www.aetnastudenthealth.com for a copy of the comprehensive guidelines supported by 
HRSA, items or services with an “A” or “B” rating from USPSTF, and immunizations 
recommended by ACIP.    
   
A. Well-Baby and Well-Child Care.  We Cover well-baby and well-child care which 
consists of routine physical examinations including vision screenings and hearing 
screenings, developmental assessment, anticipatory guidance, and laboratory 
tests ordered at the time of the visit as recommended by the American Academy 
of Pediatrics.  We also Cover preventive care and screenings as provided for in 
the comprehensive guidelines supported by HRSA and items or services with an 
“A” or “B” rating from USPSTF.  If the schedule of well-child visits referenced 
above permits one (1) well-child visit per Plan Year, We will not deny a well-child 
visit if 365 days have not passed since the previous well-child visit.  
Immunizations and boosters as recommended by ACIP are also Covered.  This 
benefit is provided to Members from birth through attainment of age 19 and is not 
subject to Cost-Sharing when provided by a Participating Provider. 
 
B.  Adult Annual Physical Examinations.  We Cover adult annual physical 
examinations and preventive care and screenings as provided for in the 
comprehensive guidelines supported by HRSA and items or services with an “A” 
or “B” rating from USPSTF.   
 
Examples of items or services with an “A” or “B” rating from USPSTF include, but 
are not limited to, blood pressure screening for adults, lung cancer screening, 
CU2425-01
27


colorectal cancer screening, alcohol misuse screening, depression screening and 
diabetes screening.  A complete list of the Covered preventive Services is 
available on Our website www.aetnastudenthealth.com, or will be mailed to You 
upon request.   
 
You are eligible for a physical examination once every Plan Year, regardless of 
whether or not 365 days have passed since the previous physical examination 
visit.  Vision screenings do not include refractions.   
 
This benefit is not subject to Cost-Sharing when provided in accordance with the 
comprehensive guidelines supported by HRSA and items or services with an “A” 
or “B” rating from USPSTF and when provided by a Participating Provider. 
 
C.  Adult Immunizations.  We Cover adult immunizations as recommended by 
ACIP.  This benefit is not subject to Cost-Sharing when provided in accordance 
with the recommendations of ACIP and when provided by a Participating 
Provider. 
 
D.  Well-Woman Examinations.  We Cover well-woman examinations which 
consist of a routine gynecological examination, breast examination and annual 
screening for cervical cancer, including laboratory and diagnostic services in 
connection with evaluating cervical cancer screening tests.  We also Cover 
preventive care and screenings as provided for in the comprehensive guidelines 
supported by HRSA and items or services with an “A” or “B” rating from USPSTF.  
A complete list of the Covered preventive Services is available on Our website at 
www.aetnastudenthealth.com, or will be mailed to You upon request.  This 
benefit is not subject to Cost-Sharing when provided in accordance with the 
comprehensive guidelines supported by HRSA and items or services with an “A” 
or “B” rating from USPSTF, which may be less frequent than described above, 
and when provided by a Participating Provider.   
 
E. Mammograms, Screening and Diagnostic Imaging for the Detection of 
Breast Cancer.  We Cover mammograms, which may be provided by breast 
tomosynthesis (i.e., 3D mammograms), for the screening of breast cancer as  
Follows: 
• One (1) baseline screening mammogram for Members age 35 through 39;  
• One (1) screening mammogram annually for Members age 40 and over. 
 
If a Member of any age has a history of breast cancer or a first degree relative 
has a history of breast cancer, We Cover mammograms as recommended by the 
Member’s Provider.  However, in no event will more than one (1) preventive 
screening per Plan Year be Covered.   
 
Mammograms for the screening of breast cancer are not subject to Cost-Sharing 
when provided by a Participating Provider. 
 
CU2425-01
28


We also Cover additional screening and diagnostic imaging for the detection of 
breast cancer, including diagnostic mammograms, breast ultrasounds and MRIs.  
Screening and diagnostic imaging for the detection of breast cancer, including 
diagnostic mammograms, breast ultrasounds and MRIs are not subject to Cost-
Sharing when provided by a Participating Provider.  
 
F.  Family Planning and Reproductive Health Services.  We Cover family 
planning services which consist of: FDA-approved contraceptive methods 
prescribed by a Provider not otherwise Covered under the Prescription Drug 
Coverage section of this Certificate, patient education and counseling on use of 
contraceptives and related topics, follow-up services related to contraceptive 
methods, including management of side effects, counseling for continued 
adherence, and device insertion and removal; and sterilization procedures for 
women.  Such services are not subject to Cost-Sharing when provided by a 
Participating Provider.   
 
We also Cover vasectomies subject to Cost-Sharing.   
 
We do not Cover services related to the reversal of elective sterilizations.  
 
G.  Bone Mineral Density Measurements or Testing.  We Cover bone mineral 
density measurements or tests, and Prescription Drugs and devices approved by 
the FDA or generic equivalents as approved substitutes.  Coverage of 
Prescription Drugs is subject to the Prescription Drug Coverage section of this 
Certificate.  Bone mineral density measurements or tests, drugs or devices shall 
include those covered under the federal Medicare program or those in 
accordance with the criteria of the National Institutes of Health.  You will qualify 
for Coverage if You meet the criteria under the federal Medicare program or the 
criteria of the National Institutes of Health or if You meet any of the following:   
• Previously diagnosed as having osteoporosis or having a family history of 
osteoporosis; 
• With symptoms or conditions indicative of the presence or significant risk 
of osteoporosis; 
• On a prescribed drug regimen posing a significant risk of osteoporosis;  
• With lifestyle factors to a degree as posing a significant risk of 
osteoporosis; or 
• With such age, gender, and/or other physiological characteristics which 
pose a significant risk for osteoporosis. 
 
We also Cover osteoporosis screening as provided for in the comprehensive 
guidelines supported by HRSA and items or services with an “A” or “B” rating 
from USPSTF. 
 
This benefit is not subject to Cost-Sharing when provided by a Participating 
Provider and in accordance with the comprehensive guidelines supported by 
HRSA and items or services with an “A” or “B” rating from USPSTF, which may 
CU2425-01
29


not include all of the above services such as drugs and devices. 
 
H.  Prostate Cancer Screening.  We Cover an annual standard diagnostic 
examination including, but not limited to, a digital rectal examination and a 
prostate specific antigen test for Members age 50 and over who are 
asymptomatic and for Members age 40 and over with a family history of prostate 
cancer or other prostate cancer risk factors.  We also Cover standard diagnostic 
testing including, but not limited to, a digital rectal examination and a prostate-
specific antigen test, at any age for men having a prior history of prostate cancer.   
 
This benefit is not subject to Cost-Sharing when provided by a Participating 
Provider.   
 
I. Colon Cancer Screening.  We Cover colon cancer screening for Members age 
45-75, including all colon cancer examinations or laboratory tests in accordance 
with the USPSTF for average risk individuals.  This benefit includes an initial 
colonscopy or other medical test for colon cancer screening and a follow-up 
colonscopy performed because of a positive result from a non-colonscopy 
preventive screening test.  
 
This benefit is not subject to Cost-Sharing when provided in accordance with the 
recommendations of the USPSTF and when provided by a Participating Provider. 
 
 
CU2425-01
30


 
SECTION VII 
 
Ambulance and Pre-Hospital Emergency Medical Services  
 
Please refer to the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate for Cost-Sharing 
requirements, day or visit limits, and any Preauthorization or Referral requirements that 
apply to these benefits.  Pre-Hospital Emergency Medical Services and ambulance 
services for the treatment of an Emergency Condition do not require Preauthorization.   
 
A. Emergency Ambulance Transportation. 
1. Pre-Hospital Emergency Medical Services.  We Cover Pre-Hospital 
Emergency Medical Services worldwide for the treatment of an Emergency 
Condition when such services are provided by an ambulance service. 
 
“Pre-Hospital Emergency Medical Services” means the prompt evaluation and 
treatment of an Emergency Condition and/or non-airborne transportation to a 
Hospital.  The services must be provided by an ambulance service issued a 
certificate under the New York Public Health Law.  We will, however, only Cover 
transportation to a Hospital provided by such an ambulance service when a 
prudent layperson, possessing an average knowledge of medicine and health, 
could reasonably expect the absence of such transportation to result in: 
• Placing the health of the person afflicted with such condition or, with respect to 
a pregnant woman, the health of the woman or her unborn child in serious 
jeopardy, or in the case of a behavioral condition, placing the health of such 
person or others in serious jeopardy; 
• Serious impairment to such person’s bodily functions;  
• Serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part of such person; or  
• Serious disfigurement of such person. 
 
An ambulance service must hold You harmless and may not charge or seek 
reimbursement from You for Pre-Hospital Emergency Medical Services except 
for the collection of any applicable Copayment, Deductible, or Coinsurance.   
 
In the absence of negotiated rates, We will pay a Non-Participating Provider the 
usual and customary charge for Pre-Hospital Emergency Medical Services, 
which shall not be excessive or unreasonable. The usual and customary charge 
for Pre-Hospital Emergency Medical Services is the lesser of the FAIR Health 
rate at the 80th percentile calculated using the place of pickup or the Provider’s 
billed charges. 
 
2. Emergency Ambulance Transportation. In addition to Pre-Hospital Emergency 
Medical Services, We also Cover emergency ambulance transportation 
worldwide by a licensed ambulance service (either ground, water or air 
ambulance) to the nearest Hospital where Emergency Services can be 
performed.  This coverage includes emergency ambulance transportation to a 
Hospital when the originating Facility does not have the ability to treat Your 
CU2425-01
31


Emergency Condition.   
 
B.  Non-Emergency Ambulance Transportation.  
We Cover non-emergency ambulance transportation by a licensed ambulance 
service (either ground or air ambulance, as appropriate) between Facilities when the 
transport is any of the following: 
• From a non-participating Hospital to a participating Hospital; 
• To a Hospital that provides a higher level of care that was not available at the 
original Hospital; 
• To a more cost-effective Acute care Facility; or 
• From an Acute care Facility to a sub-Acute setting. 
 
C.  Limitations/Terms of Coverage.   
• We do not Cover travel or transportation expenses, unless connected to an 
Emergency Condition or due to a Facility transfer approved by Us, even though 
prescribed by a Physician.   
• We do not Cover non-ambulance transportation such as ambulette, van or taxi cab. 
• Coverage for air ambulance related to an Emergency Condition or air ambulance 
related to non-emergency transportation is provided when Your medical condition 
is such that transportation by land ambulance is not appropriate; and Your 
medical condition requires immediate and rapid ambulance transportation that 
cannot be provided by land ambulance; and one (1) of the following is met: 
o The point of pick-up is inaccessible by land vehicle; or 
o Great distances or other obstacles (e.g., heavy traffic) prevent Your timely 
transfer to the nearest Hospital with appropriate facilities. 
 
D.  Payments for Air Ambulance Services.  We will pay a Participating Provider the 
amount We have negotiated with the Participating Provider for the air ambulance 
service. 
 
We will pay a Non-Participating Provider the amount We have negotiated with the 
Non-Participating Provider for the air ambulance service or an amount We have 
determined is reasonable for the air ambulance service. However, the negotiated 
amount or the amount We determine is reasonable will not exceed the Non-
Participating Provider’s charge. 
 
If a dispute involving a payment for air ambulance services is submitted to an 
independent dispute resolution entity (IDRE), We will pay the amount, if any, 
determined by the IDRE for the air ambulance services. 
 
You are responsible for any In-Network Cost-Sharing for air ambulance services.  
The Non-Participating Provider may only bill You for Your In-Network Cost-Sharing.  
If You receive a bill from a Non-Participating Provider that is more than Your In-
Network Cost-Sharing, You should contact Us.  
 
 
CU2425-01
32


SECTION VIII 
Emergency Services and Urgent Care 
Please refer to the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate for Cost-Sharing 
requirements, day or visit limits, and any Preauthorization or Referral requirements that 
apply to these benefits.   
A. Emergency Services.
We Cover Emergency Services for the treatment of an Emergency Condition in a Hospital.
We define an “Emergency Condition” to mean:  A medical or behavioral condition that 
manifests itself by Acute symptoms of sufficient severity, including severe pain, such that a 
prudent layperson, possessing an average knowledge of medicine and health, could 
reasonably expect the absence of immediate medical attention to result in:  
•
Placing the health of the person afflicted with such condition or, with respect to a
pregnant woman, the health of the woman or her unborn child in serious jeopardy,
or in the case of a behavioral condition, placing the health of such person or others
in serious jeopardy;
•
Serious impairment to such person’s bodily functions;
•
Serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part of such person; or
•
Serious disfigurement of such person.
For example, an Emergency Condition may include, but is not limited to, the following 
conditions:  
•
Severe chest pain
•
Severe or multiple injuries
•
Severe shortness of breath
•
Sudden change in mental status (e.g., disorientation)
•
Severe bleeding
•
Acute pain or conditions requiring immediate attention such as suspected heart
attack or appendicitis
•
Poisonings
•
Convulsions
Coverage of Emergency Services for treatment of Your Emergency Condition will be 
provided regardless of whether the Provider is a Participating Provider.  We will also Cover 
Emergency Services to treat Your Emergency Condition worldwide.  However, We will 
Cover only those Emergency Services and supplies that are Medically Necessary and are 
performed to treat or stabilize Your Emergency Condition in a Hospital.  
Please follow the instructions listed below regardless of whether or not You are in Our 
Service Area at the time Your Emergency Condition occurs: 
1. Hospital Emergency Department Visits.  In the event that You require treatment for
an Emergency Condition, seek immediate care at the nearest Hospital emergency
department or call 911.  Emergency Department Care does not require
Preauthorization.  However, only Emergency Services for the treatment of an
Emergency Condition are Covered in an emergency department.  If You are
CU2425-01
33


uncertain whether a Hospital emergency department is the most appropriate place to 
receive care, You can call Us before You seek treatment. 
We do not Cover follow-up care or routine care provided in a Hospital emergency 
department.   
2. Emergency Hospital Admissions.  We cover inpatient Hospital services following
Emergency Department Care at a non-participating Hospital at the In-Network Cost-
Sharing.  If Your medical condition permits Your transfer to a participating Hospital, We
will notify You and work with You to arrange the transfer.
3. Payments Relating to Emergency Services.  We will pay a Participating Provider the
amount We have negotiated with the Participating Provider for the Emergency Services.
We will pay a Non-Participating Provider the amount We have negotiated with the Non-
Participating Provider for the Emergency Service or an amount We have determined is
reasonable for the Emergency Service.  However, the negotiated amount or the amount
We determine is reasonable will not exceed the Non-Participating Provider’s charge.
If a dispute involving a payment for Emergency Services is submitted to an independent
dispute resolution entity (IDRE), We will pay the amount, if any, determined by the IDRE
for the services.
You are responsible for any In-Network Cost-Sharing.  You will be held harmless for
any Non-Participating Provider charges that exceed Your In-Network Cost-Sharing.
The Non-Participating Provider may only bill You for Your In-Network Cost-Sharing.  If
You receive a bill from a Non-Participating Provider that is more than Your In-Network
Cost-Sharing, You should contact Us.
B. Urgent Care.
Urgent Care is medical care for an illness, injury or condition serious enough that a
reasonable person would seek care right away, but not so severe as to require Emergency
Department Care.  Urgent Care is typically available after normal business hours, including
evenings and weekends.  If You need care after normal business hours, including
evenings, weekends or holidays, You have options.  You can call Your Student Health
Services, if applicable, Your Provider’s office for instructions or visit an Urgent Care Center.
If You have an Emergency Condition, seek immediate care at the nearest Hospital
emergency department or call 911.  Urgent Care is Covered in or out of Our Service
Area.
1. In-Network.  We Cover Urgent Care from a participating Physician or a participating
Urgent Care Center.
2. Out-of-Network.  We Cover Urgent Care from a non-participating Urgent Care Center
or Physician network. However, You should obtain Preauthorization from Us for
services to be covered at the in-network Cost-Sharing.  Please contact Us at the
number on Your ID card and You will be provided with instructions.  We are available 24
hours a day, seven (7) days a week to help You in urgent medical situations.
CU2425-01
34


SECTION IX 
Outpatient and Professional Services 
Please refer to the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate for Cost-Sharing 
requirements, day or visit limits, and any Preauthorization or Referral requirements that 
apply to these benefits.   
A. Acupuncture.
We Cover acupuncture services rendered by a Health Care Professional licensed to
provide such services.
•
Chronic (minimum 12 weeks duration) neck pain; or
•
Chronic (minimum 12 weeks duration) headache; or
•
Low back pain; or
•
Nausea of pregnancy; or
•
Pain from osteoarthritis of the knee or hip (adjunctive therapy); or
•
Post-operative and chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting; or
•
Post-operative dental pain; or
•
Temporomandibular disorders (TMD).
B. Advanced Imaging Services.
We Cover PET scans, MRI, nuclear medicine, and CAT scans.
C. Allergy Testing and Treatment.
We Cover testing and evaluations including injections, and scratch and prick tests to
determine the existence of an allergy.  We also Cover allergy treatment, including
desensitization treatments, routine allergy injections and serums.
D. Ambulatory Surgical Center Services.
We Cover surgical procedures performed at Ambulatory Surgical Centers including
services and supplies provided by the center the day the surgery is performed.
E. Chemotherapy and Immunotherapy.
We Cover chemotherapy and immunotherapy in an outpatient Facility or in a Health
Care Professional’s office.  Chemotherapy and immunotherapy may be administered by
injection or infusion.  Orally-administered anti-cancer drugs are Covered under the
Prescription Drug Coverage section of this Certificate.
F. Chiropractic Services.
We Cover chiropractic care when performed by a Doctor of Chiropractic (“chiropractor”)
or a Physician in connection with the detection or correction by manual or mechanical
means of structural imbalance, distortion or subluxation in the human body for the
purpose of removing nerve interference and the effects thereof, where such interference
is the result of or related to distortion, misalignment or subluxation of the vertebral
column.  This includes assessment, manipulation and any modalities.  Any laboratory
tests will be Covered in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Certificate.
CU2425-01
35


 
G.  Clinical Trials. 
We Cover the routine patient costs for Your participation in an approved clinical trial and 
such coverage shall not be subject to Utilization Review if You are:  
• Eligible to participate in an approved clinical trial to treat either cancer or other 
life-threatening disease or condition; and  
• Referred by a Participating Provider who has concluded that Your participation in 
the approved clinical trial would be appropriate.   
 
All other clinical trials, including when You do not have cancer or other life-threatening 
disease or condition, may be subject to the Utilization Review and External Appeal 
sections of this Certificate.  
 
We do not Cover: the costs of the investigational drugs or devices; the costs of non-
health services required for You to receive the treatment; the costs of managing the 
research; or costs that would not be covered under this Certificate for non-
investigational treatments provided in the clinical trial.  
 
An “approved clinical trial” means a phase I, II III, or IV clinical trial that is:  
• A federally funded or approved trial;  
• Conducted under an investigational drug application reviewed by the federal 
Food and Drug Administration; or  
• A drug trial that is exempt from having to make an investigational new drug 
application.  
 
H.  Dialysis. 
We Cover dialysis treatments of an Acute or chronic kidney ailment. 
 
I.  Habilitation Services. 
We Cover Habilitation Services consisting of physical therapy, speech therapy and 
occupational therapy in the outpatient department of a Facility or in a Health Care 
Professional’s office for up to 60 visits per condition per Plan Year.  The visit limit 
applies to all therapies combined.  For the purposes of this benefit, "per condition" 
means the disease or injury causing the need for the therapy. 
 
J.  Home Health Care. 
We Cover care provided in Your home by a Home Health Agency certified or licensed 
by the appropriate state agency.  The care must be provided pursuant to Your 
Physician's written treatment plan and must be in lieu of Hospitalization or confinement 
in a Skilled Nursing Facility.  Home care includes: 
• Part-time or intermittent nursing care by or under the supervision of a registered 
professional nurse; 
• Part-time or intermittent services of a home health aide; 
• Physical, occupational or speech therapy provided by the Home Health Agency; 
and  
CU2425-01
36


• Medical supplies, Prescription Drugs and medications prescribed by a Physician, 
and laboratory services by or on behalf of the Home Health Agency to the extent 
such items would have been Covered during a Hospitalization or confinement in 
a Skilled Nursing Facility.   
 
Home Health Care is limited to 40 visits per Plan Year.  Each visit by a member of the 
Home Health Agency is considered one (1) visit.  Each visit of up to four (4) hours by a 
home health aide is considered one (1) visit.  Any Rehabilitation Services or Habilitation 
Services received under this benefit will not reduce the amount of services available 
under the Rehabilitation Services or Habilitation Services benefits. 
 
K.  Infertility Treatment. 
We Cover services for the diagnosis and treatment (surgical and medical) of infertility. 
“Infertility” is a disease or condition characterized by the incapacity to impregnate 
another person or to conceive, defined by the failure to establish a clinical pregnancy 
after 12 months of regular, unprotected sexual intercourse or therapeutic donor 
insemination, or after six (6) months of regular, unprotected sexual intercourse or 
therapeutic donor insemination for a female 35 years of age or older. Earlier evaluation 
and treatment may be warranted based on a Member’s medical history or physical 
findings.   
 
Such Coverage is available as follows: 
1. Basic Infertility Services.  Basic infertility services will be provided to a Member 
who is an appropriate candidate for infertility treatment.  In order to determine 
eligibility, We will use guidelines established by the American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the American Society for Reproductive 
Medicine, and the State of New York.     
 
Basic infertility services include:   
• Initial evaluation; 
• Semen analysis;  
• Laboratory evaluation;  
• Evaluation of ovulatory function;  
• Postcoital test;  
• Endometrial biopsy;  
• Pelvic ultra sound;  
• Hysterosalpingogram;  
• Sono-hystogram;  
• Testis biopsy;  
• Blood tests; and  
• Medically appropriate treatment of ovulatory dysfunction.   
 
Additional tests may be Covered if the tests are determined to be Medically 
Necessary. 
 
CU2425-01
37


2. Comprehensive Infertility Services.  If the basic infertility services do not result 
in increased fertility, We Cover comprehensive infertility services.   
 
Comprehensive infertility services include:   
• Ovulation induction and monitoring;  
• Pelvic ultra sound;  
• Artificial insemination;  
• Hysteroscopy;  
• Laparoscopy; and  
• Laparotomy. 
 
3. Fertility Preservation Services. We Cover standard fertility preservation 
services when a medical treatment will directly or indirectly lead to iatrogenic 
infertility. Standard fertility preservation services include the collecting, 
preserving, and storing of ova and sperm. “Iatrogenic infertility” means an 
impairment of Your fertility by surgery, radiation, chemotherapy or other medical 
treatment affecting reproductive organs or processes.  
 
4. Exclusions and Limitations.  We do not Cover: 
• In vitro fertilization; 
• Gamete intrafallopian tube transfers or zygote intrafallopian tube transfers; 
• Costs associated with an ovum or sperm donor, including the donor’s 
medical expenses; 
• Cryopreservation and storage of sperm and ova except when performed 
as fertility preservation services; 
• Cryopreservation and storage of embryos; 
• Ovulation predictor kits; 
• Reversal of tubal ligations; 
• Reversal of vasectomies; 
• Costs for services relating to surrogate motherhood that are not otherwise 
Covered Services under this Certificate; 
• Cloning; or 
• Medical and surgical procedures that are experimental or investigational, 
unless Our denial is overturned by an External Appeal Agent.   
 
All services must be provided by Providers who are qualified to provide such 
services in accordance with the guidelines established and adopted by the 
American Society for Reproductive Medicine. We will not discriminate based on 
Your expected length of life, present or predicted disability, degree of medical 
dependency, perceived quality of life, other health conditions, or based on 
personal characteristics including age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status or 
gender identity, when determining coverage under this benefit.  
 
 
 
CU2425-01
38


L.  Infusion Therapy. 
We Cover infusion therapy which is the administration of drugs using specialized 
delivery systems.  Drugs or nutrients administered directly into the veins are considered 
infusion therapy.  Drugs taken by mouth or self-injected are not considered infusion 
therapy.  The services must be ordered by a Physician or other authorized Health Care 
Professional and provided in an office or by an agency licensed or certified to provide 
infusion therapy.  Any visits for home infusion therapy count toward Your home health 
care visit limit. 
 
M.  Interruption of Pregnancy. 
We Cover abortion services.  Coverage for abortion services includes any Prescription 
Drug prescribed for an abortion, including both Generic Drugs and Brand-Name Drugs, 
even if those Prescription Drugs have not been approved by the FDA for abortions, if 
the Prescription Drug is a recognized medication for abortions in one of these reference 
compendia:  
• The WHO Model Lists of Essential Medicines; 
• The WHO Abortion Care Guidelines; or 
• The National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine Consensus 
Study Report.  
 
Abortion services are not subject to Cost-Sharing when provided by a Participating 
Provider.  
 
N.  Laboratory Procedures, Diagnostic Testing and Radiology Services. 
We Cover x-ray, laboratory procedures and diagnostic testing, services and materials, 
including diagnostic x-rays, x-ray therapy, fluoroscopy, electrocardiograms, 
electroencephalograms, laboratory tests, and therapeutic radiology services. 
 
We Cover biomarker precision medical testing, including both single-analyte tests and 
multiplex panel tests, performed at a [participating] laboratory that is either CLIA 
certified or CLIA waived by the FDA, for the purpose of diagnosis, treatment, 
appropriate management, or ongoing monitoring to guide treatment decisions for Your 
disease or condition when one or more of the following recognizes the efficacy and 
appropriateness of such testing: 
• Labeled indications for a test approved or cleared by the FDA or indicated tests 
for an FDA approved Prescription Drug; 
• Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (“CMS”) national coverage 
determinations or Medicare administrative contractor local coverage 
determinations;  
• Nationally recognized clinical practice guidelines; or 
• Peer-reviewed literature and peer-reviewed scientific studies published in or 
accepted for publication by medical journals that meet nationally recognized 
requirements for scientific manuscripts and that submit most of their published 
articles for review by experts who are not part of the editorial staff. 
 
 
CU2425-01
39


O.  Maternity and Newborn Care. 
We Cover services for maternity care provided by a Physician or midwife, nurse 
practitioner, Hospital or birthing center.  We Cover prenatal care (including one (1) visit 
for genetic testing), postnatal care, delivery, and complications of pregnancy.  In order 
for services of a midwife to be Covered, the midwife must be licensed pursuant to 
Article 140 of the New York Education Law, practicing consistent with Section 6951 of 
the New York Education Law and affiliated or practicing in conjunction with a Facility 
licensed pursuant to Article 28 of the New York Public Health Law.  We will not pay for 
duplicative routine services provided by both a midwife and a Physician.  See the 
Inpatient Services section of this Certificate for Coverage of inpatient maternity care. 
 
We Cover breastfeeding support, counseling, and supplies, including the cost of renting 
or the purchase of one (1) breast pump per pregnancy for the duration of breast feeding 
from a Participating Provider or designated vendor.   
 
P.  Office Visits. 
We Cover office visits for the diagnosis and treatment of injury, disease and medical 
conditions.  Office visits may include house calls.   
 
Q.  Outpatient Hospital Services. 
We Cover Hospital services and supplies as described in the Inpatient Services section 
of this Certificate that can be provided to You while being treated in an outpatient 
Facility.  For example, Covered Services include but are not limited to inhalation 
therapy, pulmonary rehabilitation, infusion therapy and cardiac rehabilitation. 
 
R.  Preadmission Testing. 
We Cover preadmission testing ordered by Your Physician and performed in Hospital 
outpatient Facilities prior to a scheduled surgery in the same Hospital provided that:  
• The tests are necessary for and consistent with the diagnosis and treatment of 
the condition for which the surgery is to be performed;  
• Reservations for a Hospital bed and operating room were made prior to the 
performance of the tests;  
• Surgery takes place within seven (7) days of the tests; and  
• The patient is physically present at the Hospital for the tests.     
 
S.  Prescription Drugs for Use in the Office and Outpatient Facilities. 
We Cover Prescription Drugs (excluding self-injectable drugs) used by Your Provider in 
the Provider’s office and Outpatient Facility for preventive and therapeutic purposes.  
This benefit applies when Your Provider orders the Prescription Drug and administers it 
to You.  When Prescription Drugs are Covered under this benefit, they will not be 
Covered under the Prescription Drug Coverage section of this Certificate. 
 
T.  Retail Health Clinics. 
We Cover basic health care services provided to You on a “walk-in” basis at retail health 
clinics, normally found in major pharmacies or retail stores.  Covered Services are 
typically provided by a physician’s assistant or nurse practitioner.  Covered Services 
CU2425-01
40


available at retail health clinics are limited to routine care and treatment of common 
illnesses.  
 
U.  Rehabilitation Services. 
We Cover Rehabilitation Services consisting of physical therapy, speech therapy and 
occupational therapy in the outpatient department of a Facility or in a Health Care 
Professional’s office for up to 60 visits per condition per Plan Year.  The visit limit 
applies to all therapies combined.  For the purpose of this benefit, "per condition" means 
the disease or injury causing the need for the therapy. 
 
Covered Rehabilitation Services must begin within six (6) months of the later to occur: 
• The date of the injury or illness that caused the need for the therapy; 
• The date You are discharged from a Hospital where surgical treatment was 
rendered; or  
• The date outpatient surgical care is rendered.  
 
V.  Second Opinions.   
1. Second Cancer Opinion.  We Cover a second medical opinion by an 
appropriate Specialist, including but not limited to a Specialist affiliated with a 
specialty care center, in the event of a positive or negative diagnosis of cancer or 
a recurrence of cancer or a recommendation of a course of treatment for cancer.  
You may obtain a second opinion from a Non-Participating Provider on an in-
network basis.   
 
2. Second Surgical Opinion.  We Cover a second surgical opinion by a qualified 
Physician on the need for surgery.  
 
3. Second Opinions in Other Cases.  There may be other instances when You 
will disagree with a Provider's recommended course of treatment.  In such cases, 
You may request that we designate another Provider to render a second opinion.  
If the first and second opinions do not agree, We will designate another Provider 
to render a third opinion.  After completion of the second opinion process, We will 
approve Covered Services supported by a majority of the Providers reviewing 
Your case.   
 
W.  Surgical Services. 
We Cover Physicians' services for surgical procedures, including operating and cutting 
procedures for the treatment of a sickness or injury, and closed reduction of fractures 
and dislocations of bones, endoscopies, incisions, or punctures of the skin on an 
inpatient and outpatient basis, including the services of the surgeon or Specialist, 
assistant (including a Physician’s assistant or a nurse practitioner), and anesthetist or 
anesthesiologist, together with preoperative and post-operative care.  Benefits are not 
available for anesthesia services provided as part of a surgical procedure when 
rendered by the surgeon or the surgeon’s assistant.   
 
CU2425-01
41


Sometimes two (2) or more surgical procedures can be performed during the same 
operation.  
1. Through the Same Incision.  If Covered multiple surgical procedures are 
performed through the same incision, We will pay for the procedure with the 
highest Allowed Amount and 50% of the amount We would otherwise pay under 
this Certificate for the secondary procedures, except for secondary procedures 
that, according to nationally-recognized coding rules, are exempt from multiple 
surgical procedure reductions.  We will not pay anything for a secondary 
procedure that is billed with a primary procedure when that secondary procedure 
is incidental to the primary procedure.   
 
  
2. Through Different Incisions.  If Covered multiple surgical procedures are 
performed during the same operative session but through different incisions, We  
will pay: 
• For the procedure with the highest Allowed Amount; and  
• 50% of the amount We would otherwise pay for the other procedures. 
 
X.  Oral Surgery. 
We Cover the following limited dental and oral surgical procedures: 
• Oral surgical procedures for jaw bones or surrounding tissue and dental services 
for the repair or replacement of sound natural teeth that are required due to 
accidental injury.  Replacement is Covered only when repair is not possible.  
Dental services must be obtained within 12 months of the injury. 
• Oral surgical procedures for jaw bones or surrounding tissue and dental services 
necessary due to congenital disease or anomaly. 
• Oral surgical procedures required for the correction of a non-dental physiological 
condition which has resulted in a severe functional impairment. 
• Removal of tumors and cysts requiring pathological examination of the jaws, 
cheeks, lips, tongue, roof and floor of the mouth.  Cysts related to teeth are not 
Covered. 
• Surgical/nonsurgical medical procedures for temporomandibular joint disorders 
and orthognathic surgery. 
     
Y.  Reconstructive Breast Surgery. 
We Cover breast or chest wall reconstruction surgery after a mastectomy or partial 
mastectomy.  Coverage includes: all stages of reconstruction of the breast or chest wall 
on which the mastectomy or partial mastectomy has been performed; surgery and 
reconstruction of the other breast or chest wall to produce a symmetrical appearance; 
and physical complications of the mastectomy or partial mastectomy, including 
lymphedemas, in a manner determined by You and Your attending Physician to be 
appropriate.  Chest wall reconstruction surgery includes aesthetic flat closure as defined 
by the National Cancer Institute.  We also Cover implanted breast prostheses following 
a mastectomy or partial mastectomy. 
 
 
 
CU2425-01
42


Z.  Other Reconstructive and Corrective Surgery. 
We Cover reconstructive and corrective surgery other than reconstructive breast 
surgery only when it is: 
• Performed to correct a congenital birth defect of a covered Child which has 
resulted in a functional defect;  
• 
Incidental to surgery or follows surgery that was necessitated by trauma, 
infection or disease of the involved part; or  
• 
Otherwise Medically Necessary.   
 
AA. Telemedicine Program. 
In addition to providing Covered Services via telehealth, We Cover online internet 
consultations between You and Providers who participate in Our telemedicine program 
for medical conditions that are not an Emergency Condition. Not all Participating 
Providers participate in Our telemedicine program.  You can check Our Provider 
directory or contact Us for a listing of the Providers that participate in Our telemedicine 
program; Teledoc. 
 
Teladoc is not designed to replace a Primary Care Physician (PCP) relationship, but 
rather supplement a member's access to care as an additional and more efficient 
option. 
 
Some of the more common illnesses that Teladoc handles are as follows: 
• Allergies 
• Basic Dermatological issues 
• (Episodic) Behavioral Health needs (such as Anxiety, Panic Attacks and 
Depression) 
• Bronchitis, Cough, Upper respiratory infection, Nasal Congestion and 
Sinus Problems, 
• Ear infection 
• Flu 
• Pink eye 
• Urinary tract infection 
 
Note: No controlled substances, psychiatric or lifestyle drugs will be prescribed by 
Teladoc. 
 
Teladoc is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: 
www.teladoc.com  
1-800-835-2362 
 
BB.  Transplants.   
We Cover only those transplants determined to be non-experimental and non-
investigational.  Covered transplants include but are not limited to: kidney, corneal, liver, 
heart, and heart/lung transplants; and bone marrow transplants for aplastic anemia,  
 
 
CU2425-01
43


leukemia, severe combined immunodeficiency disease and Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome.   
 
All transplants must be prescribed by Your Specialist(s).  Additionally, all 
transplants must be performed at Hospitals that We have specifically approved 
and designated to perform these procedures.  
     
We Cover the Hospital and medical expenses, including donor search fees, of the 
Member-recipient.  We Cover transplant services required by You when You serve as 
an organ donor only if the recipient is a Member.  We do not Cover the medical 
expenses of a non-Member acting as a donor for You if the non-Member's expenses will 
be Covered under another health plan or program.   
 
We do not Cover:  travel expenses, lodging, meals, or other accommodations for donors 
or guests; donor fees in connection with organ transplant surgery; or routine harvesting 
and storage of stem cells from newborn cord blood. 
CU2425-01
44


SECTION X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additional Benefits, Equipment and Devices 
 
Please refer to the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate for Cost-Sharing 
requirements, day or visit limits, and any Preauthorization or Referral requirements that 
apply to these benefits. 
 
A.  Diabetic Equipment, Supplies and Self-Management Education. 
We Cover diabetic equipment, supplies, and self-management education if recommended 
or prescribed by a Physician or other licensed Health Care Professional legally authorized 
to prescribe under Title 8 of the New York Education Law as described below: 
 
1. Equipment and Supplies. 
We Cover the following equipment and related supplies for the treatment of diabetes 
when prescribed by Your Physician or other Provider legally authorized to prescribe: 
• 
Acetone reagent strips 
• 
Acetone reagent tablets 
• 
Alcohol or peroxide by the pint 
• 
Alcohol wipes 
• 
All insulin preparations 
• 
Automatic blood lance kit 
• 
Cartridges for the visually impaired 
• 
Diabetes data management systems 
• 
Disposable insulin and pen cartridges 
• 
Drawing-up devices for the visually impaired 
• 
Equipment for use of the pump 
• 
Glucagon for injection to increase blood glucose concentration  
• 
Glucose acetone reagent strips 
• 
Glucose kit 
• 
Glucose monitor with or without special features for visually impaired, 
control solutions, and strips for home glucose monitor 
• 
Glucose reagent tape 
• 
Glucose test or reagent strips 
• 
Injection aides 
• 
Injector (Busher) Automatic 
• 
Insulin 
• 
Insulin cartridge delivery 
• 
Insulin infusion devices 
• 
Insulin pump 
• 
Lancets 
• 
Oral agents such as glucose tablets and gels 
• 
Oral anti-diabetic agents used to reduce blood sugar levels  
• 
Syringe with needle; sterile 1 cc box  
• 
Urine testing products for glucose and ketones 
• 
Additional supplies, as the New York State Commissioner of Health shall  
 
designate by regulation as appropriate for the treatment of diabetes. 
CU2425-01
45


2. Self-Management Education. 
Diabetes self-management education is designed to educate persons with 
diabetes as to the proper self-management and treatment of their diabetic 
condition, including information on proper diets.  We Cover education on self-
management and nutrition when: diabetes is initially diagnosed; a Physician 
diagnoses a significant change in Your symptoms or condition which 
necessitates a change in Your self-management education; or when a refresher 
course is necessary.  It must be provided in accordance with the following:   
• 
By a Physician, other health care Provider authorized to prescribe under 
Title 8 of the New York Education Law, or their staff during an office visit;    
• 
Upon the Referral of Your Physician or other health care Provider 
authorized to prescribe under Title 8 of the New York Education Law to 
the following non-Physician, medical educators:  certified diabetes nurse 
educators; certified nutritionists; certified dietitians; and registered 
dietitians in a group setting when practicable; and   
• 
Education will also be provided in Your home when Medically Necessary. 
 
3. Limitations. 
The items will only be provided in amounts that are in accordance with the 
treatment plan developed by the Physician for You.  We Cover only basic models 
of blood glucose monitors unless You have special needs relating to poor vision 
or blindness or otherwise Medically Necessary.   
 
B.  Durable Medical Equipment and Braces. 
We Cover the rental or purchase of durable medical equipment and braces. 
 
1. Durable Medical Equipment. 
 
 
Durable Medical Equipment is equipment which is:  
• 
Designed and intended for repeated use;  
• 
Primarily and customarily used to serve a medical purpose;  
• 
Generally not useful to a person in the absence of disease or injury; and  
• 
Appropriate for use in the home. 
 
Coverage is for standard equipment only.  We Cover the cost of repair or 
replacement when made necessary by normal wear and tear.  We do not Cover 
the cost of repair or replacement that is the result of misuse or abuse by You.  
We will determine whether to rent or purchase such equipment.   We do not 
Cover over-the-counter durable medical equipment. 
 
We do not Cover equipment designed for Your comfort or convenience (e.g., 
pools, hot tubs, air conditioners, saunas, humidifiers, dehumidifiers, exercise 
equipment), as it does not meet the definition of durable medical equipment. 
 
2. Braces. 
We Cover braces, including orthotic braces, that are worn externally and that 
temporarily or permanently assist all or part of an external body part function that 
CU2425-01
46


has been lost or damaged because of an injury, disease or defect.  Coverage is 
for standard equipment only.  We Cover replacements when growth or a change 
in Your medical condition make replacement necessary.  We do not Cover the 
cost of repair or replacement that is the result of misuse or abuse by You. 
 
C.  Hearing Aids. 
1.  External Hearing Aids. 
We Cover hearing aids required for the correction of a hearing impairment (a 
reduction in the ability to perceive sound which may range from slight to 
complete deafness).  Hearing aids are electronic amplifying devices designed to 
bring sound more effectively into the ear.  A hearing aid consists of a 
microphone, amplifier and receiver.   
 
Covered Services are available for a hearing aid that is purchased as a result of 
a written recommendation by a Physician and include the hearing aid and the 
charges for associated fitting and testing.  We Cover a single purchase (including 
repair and/or replacement) of hearing aids for one (1) or both ears once every 
three (3) years.   
 
2.  Cochlear Implants.  
We Cover bone anchored hearing aids (i.e., cochlear implants) when they are 
Medically Necessary to correct a hearing impairment.  Examples of when bone 
anchored hearing aids are Medically Necessary include the following: 
• 
Craniofacial anomalies whose abnormal or absent ear canals preclude the 
use of a wearable hearing aid; or  
• 
Hearing loss of sufficient severity that it would not be adequately remedied 
by a wearable hearing aid. 
 
Coverage is provided for one (1) hearing aid per ear during the entire period of 
time that You are enrolled under this Certificate.  We Cover repair and/or 
replacement of a bone anchored hearing aid only for malfunctions. 
 
D.  Hospice. 
Hospice Care is available if Your primary attending Physician has certified that You 
have six (6) months or less to live.  We Cover inpatient Hospice Care in a Hospital or 
hospice and home care and outpatient services provided by the hospice, including 
drugs and medical supplies.  Coverage is provided for 210 days of Hospice Care.  We 
also Cover five (5) visits for supportive care and guidance for the purpose of helping 
You and Your immediate family cope with the emotional and social issues related to 
Your death, either before or after Your death. 
 
We Cover Hospice Care only when provided as part of a Hospice Care program 
certified pursuant to Article 40 of the New York Public Health Law.  If care is provided 
outside New York State, the hospice must be certified under a similar certification 
process required by the state in which the hospice is located.  We do not Cover: funeral 
arrangements; pastoral, financial, or legal counseling; or homemaker, caretaker, or 
respite care. 
CU2425-01
47


E.  Medical Supplies. 
We Cover medical supplies that are required for the treatment of a disease or injury 
which is Covered under this Certificate.  We also Cover maintenance supplies (e.g., 
ostomy supplies) for conditions Covered under this Certificate.  All such supplies must 
be in the appropriate amount for the treatment or maintenance program in progress.  
We do not Cover over-the-counter medical supplies.  See the Diabetic Equipment, 
Supplies, and Self-Management Education section above for a description of diabetic 
supply Coverage.  
 
F.  Prosthetics. 
1. External Prosthetic Devices. 
We Cover prosthetic devices (including wigs) that are worn externally and that 
temporarily or permanently replace all or part of an external body part that has 
been lost or damaged because of an injury or disease.  We Cover wigs only 
when You have severe hair loss due to injury or disease or as a side effect of the 
treatment of a disease (e.g., chemotherapy).  We do not Cover wigs made from 
human hair unless You are allergic to all synthetic wig materials.   
 
We do not Cover dentures or other devices used in connection with the teeth 
unless required due to an accidental injury to sound natural teeth or necessary 
due to congenital disease or anomaly.   
 
Eyeglasses and contact lenses are not Covered under this section of the Certificate 
and are only Covered under the Pediatric Vision Care section of this Certificate.   
 
We do not Cover shoe inserts. 
 
We Cover external breast prostheses following a mastectomy, which are not 
subject to any lifetime limit.  
 
Coverage is for standard equipment only.   
 
We Cover the cost of one (1) prosthetic device, per limb, per Plan Year.   We 
also Cover the cost of repair and replacement of the prosthetic device and its 
parts.  We do not Cover the cost of repair or replacement covered under 
warranty or if the repair or replacement is the result of misuse or abuse by You.  
 
2. Internal Prosthetic Devices. 
We Cover surgically implanted prosthetic devices and special appliances if they 
improve or restore the function of an internal body part which has been removed 
or damaged due to disease or injury.  This includes implanted breast prostheses 
following a mastectomy or partial mastectomy in a manner determined by You 
and Your attending Physician to be appropriate.   
 
Coverage also includes repair and replacement due to normal growth or normal 
wear and tear. 
 
Coverage is for standard equipment only. 
CU2425-01
48


SECTION XI 
 
Inpatient Services 
 
Please refer to the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate for Cost-Sharing 
requirements, day or visit limits, and any Preauthorization or Referral requirements that 
apply to these benefits. 
 
A.  Hospital Services.   
We Cover inpatient Hospital services for Acute care or treatment given or ordered by a 
Health Care Professional for an illness, injury or disease of a severity that must be 
treated on an inpatient basis including:  
• Semiprivate room and board;  
• General, special and critical nursing care;  
• Meals and special diets;  
• The use of operating, recovery and cystoscopic rooms and equipment; 
• The use of intensive care, special care or cardiac care units and equipment;   
• Diagnostic and therapeutic items, such as drugs and medications, sera, 
biologicals and vaccines, intravenous preparations and visualizing dyes and 
administration, but not including those which are not commercially available for 
purchase and readily obtainable by the Hospital;   
• Dressings and casts; 
• Supplies and the use of equipment in connection with oxygen, anesthesia, 
physiotherapy, chemotherapy, electrocardiographs, electroencephalographs, x-
ray examinations and radiation therapy, laboratory and pathological 
examinations;    
• Blood and blood products except when participation in a volunteer blood 
replacement program is available to You; 
• Radiation therapy, inhalation therapy, chemotherapy, pulmonary rehabilitation, 
infusion therapy and cardiac rehabilitation;   
• Short-term physical, speech and occupational therapy; and 
• Any additional medical services and supplies which are provided while You are a 
registered bed patient and which are billed by the Hospital. 
 
The Cost-Sharing requirements in the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate 
apply to a continuous Hospital confinement, which is consecutive days of in-Hospital 
service received as an inpatient or successive confinements when discharge from and 
readmission to the Hospital occur within a period of not more than 90 days for the same 
or related causes.   
 
B.  Observation Services.   
We Cover observation services in a Hospital.  Observation services are Hospital 
outpatient services provided to help a Physician decide whether to admit or discharge 
You.  These services include use of a bed and periodic monitoring by nursing or other 
licensed staff.    
 
CU2425-01
49


C.  Inpatient Medical Services. 
We Cover medical visits by a Health Care Professional on any day of inpatient care 
Covered under this Certificate. 
  
D.  Inpatient Stay for Maternity Care. 
We Cover inpatient maternity care in a Hospital for the mother, and inpatient newborn 
care in a Hospital for the infant, for at least 48 hours following a normal delivery and at 
least 96 hours following a caesarean section delivery, regardless of whether such care 
is Medically Necessary.  The care provided shall include parent education, assistance, 
and training in breast or bottle-feeding, and the performance of any necessary maternal 
and newborn clinical assessments.  We will also Cover any additional days of such care 
that We determine are Medically Necessary.  In the event the mother elects to leave the 
Hospital and requests a home care visit before the end of the 48-hour or 96-hour 
minimum Coverage period, We will Cover a home care visit.  The home care visit will be 
provided within 24 hours after the mother's discharge, or at the time of the mother's 
request, whichever is later.  Our Coverage of this home care visit shall be in addition to 
home health care visits under this Certificate and shall not be subject to any Cost-
Sharing amounts in the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate that apply to 
home care benefits. 
 
We also Cover the inpatient use of pasteurized donor human milk, which may include 
fortifiers as Medically Necessary, for which a Health Care Professional has issued an 
order for an infant who is medically or physically unable to receive maternal breast milk, 
participate in breast feeding, or whose mother is medically or physically unable to 
produce maternal breast milk at all or in sufficient quantities or participate in breast 
feeding despite optimal lactation support.  Such infant must have a documented birth 
weight of less than one thousand five hundred grams, or a congenital or acquired 
condition that places the infant at a high risk for development of necrotizing 
enterocolitis.  
 
E.  Inpatient Stay for Mastectomy Care. 
We Cover inpatient services for Members undergoing a lymph node dissection, 
lumpectomy, mastectomy or partial mastectomy for the treatment of breast cancer and 
any physical complications arising from the mastectomy, including lymphedema, for a 
period of time determined to be medically appropriate by You and Your attending 
Physician. 
 
F.  Autologous Blood Banking Services. 
We Cover autologous blood banking services only when they are being provided in 
connection with a scheduled, Covered inpatient procedure for the treatment of a 
disease or injury.  In such instances, We Cover storage fees for a reasonable storage 
period that is appropriate for having the blood available when it is needed. 
 
G.  Habilitation Services. 
We Cover inpatient Habilitation Services consisting of physical therapy, speech therapy 
and occupational therapy for 60 days per Plan Year.  The visit limit applies to all 
therapies combined. 
CU2425-01
50


H.  Rehabilitation Services. 
We Cover inpatient Rehabilitation Services consisting of physical therapy, speech 
therapy and occupational therapy for 60 days per Plan Year.  The visit limit applies to all 
therapies combined. 
 
We Cover speech and physical therapy only when: 
1. Such therapy is related to the treatment or diagnosis of Your illness or injury (in 
the case of a covered Child, this includes a medically diagnosed congenital 
defect); 
2. The therapy is ordered by a Physician; and 
3. You have been hospitalized or have undergone surgery for such illness or injury. 
 
Covered Rehabilitation Services must begin within six (6) months of the later to occur: 
1. The date of the injury or illness that caused the need for the therapy; 
2. The date You are discharged from a Hospital where surgical treatment was 
rendered; or  
3. The date outpatient surgical care is rendered. 
 
I.  Skilled Nursing Facility. 
We Cover services provided in a Skilled Nursing Facility, including care and treatment in 
a semi-private room, as described in “Hospital Services” above.  Custodial, 
convalescent or domiciliary care is not Covered (see the Exclusions and Limitations 
section of this Certificate).  An admission to a Skilled Nursing Facility must be supported 
by a treatment plan prepared by Your Provider and approved by Us.  We Cover up to 
200 days per Plan Year for non-custodial care. 
 
 
J.  End of Life Care. 
If You are diagnosed with advanced cancer and You have fewer than 60 days to live, 
We will Cover Acute care provided in a licensed Article 28 Facility or Acute care Facility 
that specializes in the care of terminally ill patients.  Your attending Physician and the 
Facility’s medical director must agree that Your care will be appropriately provided at 
the Facility.  If We disagree with Your admission to the Facility, We have the right to 
initiate an expedited external appeal to an External Appeal Agent.  We will Cover and 
reimburse the Facility for Your care, subject to any applicable limitations in this 
Certificate until the External Appeal Agent renders a decision in Our favor.   
 
We will reimburse Non-Participating Providers for this end of life care as follows: 
1. We will reimburse a rate that has been negotiated between Us and the Provider. 
2. If there is no negotiated rate, We will reimburse Acute care at the Facility’s 
current Medicare Acute care rate. 
3. If it is an alternate level of care, We will reimburse at 75% of the appropriate 
Medicare Acute care rate.  
 
K.  Limitations/Terms of Coverage.  
1. When You are receiving inpatient care in a Facility, We will not Cover additional 
charges for special duty nurses, charges for private rooms (unless a private room 
is Medically Necessary), or medications and supplies You take home from the 
CU2425-01
51


Facility.  If You occupy a private room, and the private room is not Medically 
Necessary, Our Coverage will be based on the Facility’s maximum semi-private 
room charge.  You will have to pay the difference between that charge and the 
private room charge. 
2. We do not Cover radio, telephone or television expenses, or beauty or barber 
services.   
3.  We do not Cover any charges incurred after the day We advise You it is no  
longer Medically Necessary for You to receive inpatient care, unless Our denial is 
overturned by an External Appeal Agent. 
 
 
 
CU2425-01
52


SECTION XII 
 
Mental Health Care and Substance Use Services 
 
Please refer to the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate for Cost-Sharing 
requirements, day or visit limits, and any Preauthorization or Referral requirements that 
apply to these benefits which are no more restrictive than those that apply to medical 
and surgical benefits in accordance with the federal Mental Health Parity and Addiction 
Equity Act of 2008.    
 
A. Mental Health Care Services. We Cover the following mental health care services 
to treat a mental health condition. For purposes of this benefit, “mental health condition” 
means any mental health disorder as defined in the most recent edition of the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.  
 
1. Inpatient Services.  We Cover inpatient mental health care services relating to 
the diagnosis and treatment of mental health conditions comparable to other 
similar Hospital, medical and surgical coverage provided under this Certificate.  
Coverage for inpatient services for mental health care is limited to Facilities 
defined in New York Mental Hygiene Law Section 1.03(10), such as:    
• A psychiatric center or inpatient Facility under the jurisdiction of the New 
York State Office of Mental Health;  
• A state or local government run psychiatric inpatient Facility;  
• A part of a Hospital providing inpatient mental health care services under 
an operating certificate issued by the New York State Commissioner of 
Mental Health;  
• A comprehensive psychiatric emergency program or other Facility 
providing inpatient mental health care that has been issued an operating 
certificate by the New York State Commissioner of Mental Health; 
 
and, in other states, to similarly licensed or certified Facilities.  In the absence 
of a similarly licensed or certified Facility, the Facility must be accredited by 
the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care Organizations or a 
national accreditation organization recognized by Us. 
 
We also Cover inpatient mental health care services relating to the diagnosis and 
treatment of mental health conditions received at Facilities that provide 
residential treatment, including room and board charges.  Coverage for 
residential treatment services is limited to Facilities defined in New York Mental 
Hygiene Law Section 1.03 and to residential treatment facilities that are part of a 
comprehensive care center for eating disorders identified pursuant to New York 
Mental Hygiene Law Article 30; and, in other states, to Facilities that are licensed 
or certified to provide the same level of treatment.  In the absence of a licensed 
or certified Facility that provides the same level of treatment, the Facility must be 
accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care 
Organizations or a national accreditation organization recognized by Us. 
CU2425-01
53


 
2. Outpatient Services.  We Cover outpatient mental health care services, 
including but not limited to partial hospitalization program services and intensive 
outpatient program services, relating to the diagnosis and treatment of mental 
health conditions.  Coverage for outpatient services for mental health care 
includes Facilities that have been issued an operating certificate pursuant to New 
York Mental Hygiene Law Article 31 or are operated by the New York State 
Office of Mental Health, and crisis stabilization centers licensed pursuant to New 
York Mental Hygiene Law section 36.01 and, in other states, to similarly licensed 
or certified Facilities; and services provided by a licensed psychiatrist or 
psychologist; a licensed clinical social worker; a licensed nurse practitioner; a 
licensed mental health counselor; a licensed marriage and family therapist; a 
licensed psychoanalyst; or a professional corporation or a university faculty 
practice corporation thereof.  In the absence of a similarly licensed or certified 
Facility, the Facility must be accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation 
of Health Care Organizations or a national accreditation organization recognized 
by Us.  Outpatient services also include nutritional counseling to treat a mental 
health condition.  
 
Outpatient mental health care services also include outpatient care provided at a 
preschool, elementary, or secondary school by a school-based mental health 
clinic licensed pursuant to Mental Hygiene Law Article 31, regardless of whether 
the school-based mental health clinic is a Participating Provider.  We will pay a 
Non-Participating Provider the amount We have negotiated with the Non-
Participating Provider for the outpatient mental health care services.  In the 
absence of a negotiated rate, We will pay an amount no less than the rate that 
would be paid under the Medicaid program.  However, the negotiated amount will 
not exceed the Non-Participating Provider’s charge.  The school-based mental 
health clinic shall not seek reimbursement from You for outpatient services 
provided at a school-based mental health clinic except for Your In-Network Cost-
Sharing. 
 
3. Autism Spectrum Disorder.  We Cover the following services when such 
services are prescribed or ordered by a licensed Physician or a licensed 
psychologist and are determined by Us to be Medically Necessary for the 
screening, diagnosis, or treatment of autism spectrum disorder.  For purposes of 
this benefit, “autism spectrum disorder” means any pervasive developmental 
disorder defined in the most recent edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders at the time services are rendered. 
 
i. 
Screening and Diagnosis.  We Cover assessments, evaluations, and tests 
to determine whether someone has autism spectrum disorder. 
 
ii. 
Assistive Communication Devices.  We Cover a formal evaluation by a 
speech-language pathologist to determine the need for an assistive 
communication device.  Based on the formal evaluation, We Cover the 
CU2425-01
54


rental or purchase of assistive communication devices when ordered or 
prescribed by a licensed Physician or a licensed psychologist if You are 
unable to communicate through normal means (i.e., speech or writing) when 
the evaluation indicates that an assistive communication device is likely to 
provide You with improved communication.  Examples of assistive 
communication devices include communication boards and speech-
generating devices.  Coverage is limited to dedicated devices.  We will only 
Cover devices that generally are not useful to a person in the absence of a 
communication impairment.  We do not Cover items, such as, but not limited 
to, laptop, desktop or tablet computers.  We Cover software and/or 
applications that enable a laptop, desktop or tablet computer to function as 
a speech-generating device.  Installation of the program and/or technical 
support is not separately reimbursable.  We will determine whether the 
device should be purchased or rented. 
 
We Cover repair, replacement fitting and adjustments of such devices when 
made necessary by normal wear and tear or significant change in Your 
physical condition.  We do not Cover the cost of repair or replacement made 
necessary because of loss or damage caused by misuse, mistreatment, or 
theft; however, We Cover one (1) repair or replacement per device type that 
is necessary due to behavioral issues.  Coverage will be provided for the 
device most appropriate to Your current functional level.  We do not Cover 
delivery or service charges or routine maintenance. 
 
iii. 
Behavioral Health Treatment.  We Cover counseling and treatment 
programs that are necessary to develop, maintain, or restore, to the 
maximum extent practicable, the functioning of an individual.  We will 
provide such Coverage when provided by a licensed Provider.  We Cover 
applied behavior analysis when provided by a licensed or certified applied 
behavior analysis Health Care Professional.  “Applied behavior analysis” 
means the design, implementation, and evaluation of environmental 
modifications, using behavioral stimuli and consequences, to produce 
socially significant improvement in human behavior, including the use of 
direct observation, measurement, and functional analysis of the relationship 
between environment and behavior.   
 
iv. 
Psychiatric and Psychological Care.  We Cover direct or consultative 
services provided by a psychiatrist, psychologist or a licensed clinical social 
worker with the experience required by the New York Insurance Law, 
licensed in the state in which they are practicing.  
 
v. 
Therapeutic Care.  We Cover therapeutic services necessary to develop, 
maintain, or restore, to the greatest extent practicable, functioning of the 
individual when such services are provided by licensed or certified speech 
therapists, occupational therapists, physical therapists and social workers to 
treat autism spectrum disorder and when the services provided by such 
CU2425-01
55


Providers are otherwise Covered under this Certificate.  Except as 
otherwise prohibited by law, services provided under this paragraph shall be 
included in any visit maximums applicable to services of such therapists or 
social workers under this Certificate. 
 
vi. 
Pharmacy Care.  We Cover Prescription Drugs to treat autism spectrum 
disorder that are prescribed by a Provider legally authorized to prescribe 
under Title 8 of the New York Education Law.  Coverage of such 
Prescription Drugs is subject to all the terms, provisions, and limitations that 
apply to Prescription Drug benefits under this Certificate. 
 
vii. 
Limitations.  We do not Cover any services or treatment set forth above 
when such services or treatment are provided pursuant to an individualized 
education plan under the New York Education Law.  The provision of 
services pursuant to an individualized family service plan under New York 
Public Health Law Section 2545, an individualized education plan under 
New York Education Law Article 89, or an individualized service plan 
pursuant to regulations of the New York State Office for People With 
Developmental Disabilities shall not affect coverage under this Certificate for 
services provided on a supplemental basis outside of an educational setting 
if such services are prescribed by a licensed Physician or licensed 
psychologist. 
 
You are responsible for any applicable Copayment, Deductible or 
Coinsurance provisions under this Certificate for similar services.  For 
example, any Copayment, Deductible or Coinsurance that applies to 
physical therapy visits will generally also apply to physical therapy services 
Covered under this benefit; and any Copayment, Deductible or Coinsurance 
for Prescription Drugs will generally also apply to Prescription Drugs 
Covered under this benefit.  See the Schedule of Benefits section of this 
Certificate for the Cost-Sharing requirements that apply to applied behavior 
analysis services and assistive communication devices. 
 
B. Substance Use Services. We Cover the following substance use services to treat a 
substance use disorder. For purposes of this benefit, “substance use disorder” means 
any substance use disorder as defined in the most recent edition of the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.  
 
1. Inpatient Services.  We Cover inpatient substance use services relating to the 
diagnosis and treatment of substance use disorders.  This includes Coverage for 
detoxification and rehabilitation services for substance use disorders.  Inpatient 
substance use services are limited to Facilities in New York State which are 
licensed, certified or otherwise authorized by the Office of Addiction Services and 
Supports (“OASAS”); and, in other states, to those Facilities that are licensed, 
certified or otherwise authorized by a similar state agency and accredited by the 
CU2425-01
56


Joint Commission or a national accreditation organization recognized by Us as 
alcoholism, substance abuse or chemical dependence treatment programs.   
 
We also Cover inpatient substance use services relating to the diagnosis and 
treatment of substance use disorders received at Facilities that provide 
residential treatment, including room and board charges.  Coverage for 
residential treatment services is limited to Facilities that are licensed, certified or 
otherwise authorized by OASAS; and, in other states, to those Facilities that are 
licensed, certified or otherwise authorized by a similar state agency and 
accredited by the Joint Commission or a national accreditation organization 
recognized by Us as alcoholism, substance abuse or chemical dependence 
treatment programs to provide the same level of treatment. 
 
2. Outpatient Services.  We Cover outpatient substance use services relating to 
the diagnosis and treatment of substance use disorders, including but not limited 
to partial hospitalization program services, intensive outpatient program services, 
opioid treatment programs including peer support services, counseling and 
medication-assisted treatment.  Such Coverage is limited to Facilities in New 
York State that are licensed, certified or otherwise authorized by OASAS to 
provide outpatient substance use disorder services and crisis stabilization 
centers licensed pursuant to New York Mental Hygiene Law section 36.01 and, in 
other states, to those that are licensed, certified or otherwise authorized by a 
similar state agency and accredited by the Joint Commission or a national 
accreditation organization recognized by Us as alcoholism, substance abuse or 
chemical dependence treatment programs.  Coverage in an OASAS-certified 
Facility includes services relating to the diagnosis and treatment of a substance 
use disorder provided by an OASAS credentialed Provider.  Coverage is also 
available in a professional office setting for outpatient substance use disorder 
services relating to the diagnosis and treatment of alcoholism, substance use 
and dependency or by Physicians who have been granted a waiver pursuant to 
the federal Drug Addiction Treatment Act of 2000 to prescribe Schedule III, IV 
and V narcotic medications for the treatment of opioid addiction during the Acute 
detoxification stage of treatment or during stages of rehabilitation.   
 
Additional Family Counseling.  We also Cover up to 20 outpatient visits per 
Plan Year for family counseling.  A family member will be deemed to be covered, 
for the purposes of this provision, so long as that family member: 1) identifies 
himself or herself as a family member of a person suffering from a substance use 
disorder; and 2) is covered under the same family Certificate that covers the 
person receiving, or in need of, treatment for a substance use disorder.  Our 
payment for a family member therapy session will be the same amount, 
regardless of the number of family members who attend the family therapy 
session. 
 
 
CU2425-01
57


SECTION XIII 
 
Prescription Drug Coverage 
 
   
Please refer to the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate for Cost-Sharing 
requirements, day or visit limits, and any Preauthorization or Referral requirements that 
apply to these benefits.   
 
A.  Covered Prescription Drugs.  
We Cover Medically Necessary Prescription Drugs that, except as specifically provided 
otherwise, can be dispensed only pursuant to a prescription and are: 
• Required by law to bear the legend “Caution – Federal Law prohibits dispensing 
without a prescription”;  
• FDA approved;  
• Ordered by a Provider authorized to prescribe and within the Provider’s scope of 
practice; 
• Prescribed within the approved FDA administration and dosing guidelines;  
• On Our Formulary; and 
• Dispensed by a licensed pharmacy.   
 
Covered Prescription Drugs include, but are not limited to: 
• Self-injectable/administered Prescription Drugs. 
• Inhalers (with spacers). 
• Topical dental preparations. 
• Pre-natal vitamins, vitamins with fluoride, and single entity vitamins. 
• Osteoporosis drugs and devices approved by the FDA, or generic equivalents as 
approved substitutes, for the treatment of osteoporosis and consistent with the 
criteria of the federal Medicare program or the National Institutes of Health. 
• Nutritional formulas for the treatment of phenylketonuria, branched-chain 
ketonuria, galactosemia and homocystinuria. 
• Prescription or non-prescription enteral formulas for home use, whether 
administered orally or via tube feeding, for which a Physician or other licensed 
Provider has issued a written order.  The written order must state that the enteral 
formula is Medically Necessary and has been proven effective as a disease-
specific treatment regimen.  Specific diseases and disorders include but are not 
limited to: inherited diseases of amino acid or organic acid metabolism; Crohn’s 
disease; gastroesophageal reflux; gastroesophageal motility such as chronic 
intestinal pseudo-obstruction; and multiple severe food allergies. Multiple food 
allergies include but are not limited to: immunoglobulin E and nonimmunoglobulin 
E-mediated allergies to multiple food proteins; severe food protein induced 
enterocolitis syndrome; eosinophilic disorders and impaired absorption of 
nutrients caused by disorders affecting the absorptive surface, function, length, 
and motility of the gastrointestinal tract.  
CU2425-01
58


• Modified solid food products that are low in protein, contain modified protein, or 
are amino acid based to treat certain inherited diseases of amino acid and 
organic acid metabolism and severe protein allergic conditions.  
• Prescription Drugs prescribed in conjunction with treatment or services Covered 
under the infertility treatment benefit, in the Outpatient and Professional Services 
section of this Certificate. 
• Off-label cancer drugs, so long as the Prescription Drug is recognized for the 
treatment of the specific type of cancer for which it has been prescribed in one 
(1) of the following reference compendia: the American Hospital Formulary 
Service-Drug Information; National Comprehensive Cancer Networks Drugs and 
Biologics Compendium; Thomson Micromedex DrugDex; Elsevier Gold 
Standard’s Clinical Pharmacology; or other authoritative compendia as identified 
by the Federal Secretary of Health and Human Services or the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services; or recommended by review article or editorial 
comment in a major peer reviewed professional journal. 
• Orally administered anticancer medication used to kill or slow the growth of 
cancerous cells. 
• Smoking cessation drugs, including over-the-counter drugs for which there is a 
written order and Prescription Drugs prescribed by a Provider. 
• Preventive Prescription Drugs, including over-the-counter drugs for which there is 
a written order, provided in accordance with the comprehensive guidelines 
supported by the Health Resources and Services Administration (“HRSA”) or that 
have an “A” or “B” rating from the United States Preventive Services Task Force 
(“USPSTF”).  
• Prescription drugs for pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) and post-exposure 
prophylaxis (PEP) to prevent HIV infection.  
• Prescription Drugs for the treatment of mental health and substance use 
disorders, including drugs for detoxification and maintenance treatment, all 
buprenorphine products, methadone, and long-acting injectable naltrexone, and 
opioid overdose reversal medication, including when dispensed over-the-counter. 
• Contraceptive drugs, devices and other products, including over-the-counter 
contraceptive drugs, devices and other products, approved by the FDA and as 
prescribed or otherwise authorized under State or Federal law.  “Over-the-
counter contraceptive products” means those products provided for in 
comprehensive guidelines supported by HRSA. Coverage also includes 
emergency contraception when provided pursuant to a prescription or order or 
when lawfully provided over-the-counter. You may request coverage for an 
alternative version of a contraceptive drug, device and other product if the 
Covered contraceptive drug, device and other product is not available or is 
deemed medically inadvisable, as determined by Your attending Health Care 
Provider.  You may request an exception by having Your attending Health Care 
Provider complete the Contraception Exception Form and sending it to Us. Visit 
Our website www.optumrx.com or call the number on Your ID card to get a copy 
of the form or to find out more about this exception process.  
 
You may request a copy of Our Formulary.  Our Formulary is also available on Our 
CU2425-01
59


website at www.studenthealthbenefits.cornell.edu.  You may inquire if a specific drug is 
Covered under this Certificate by contacting Us at the number on Your ID card.   
 
B.  Refills. 
We Cover Refills of Prescription Drugs only when dispensed at a retail or designated 
pharmacy as ordered by an authorized Provider and only after ¾ of the original 
Prescription Drug has been used.  Benefits for Refills will not be provided beyond one 
(1) year from the original prescription date.  For prescription eye drop medication, We 
allow for the limited refilling of the prescription prior to the last day of the approved 
dosage period without regard to any coverage restrictions on early Refill of renewals.  
To the extent practicable, the quantity of eye drops in the early Refill will be limited to 
the amount remaining on the dosage that was initially dispensed.  Your Cost-Sharing for 
the limited Refill is the amount that applies to each prescription or Refill as set forth in 
the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate. 
 
C.  Benefit and Payment Information. 
1.   Cost-Sharing Expenses.  You are responsible for paying the costs outlined in 
the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate when Covered Prescription 
Drugs are obtained from a retail or designated pharmacy.  
 
You have a three (3) tier plan design, which means that Your out-of-pocket 
expenses will generally be lowest for Prescription Drugs on tier 1 and highest for 
Prescription Drugs on tier 3.  Your out-of-pocket expense for Prescription Drugs 
on tier 2 will generally be more than for tier 1 but less than tier 3. 
 
For most Prescription Drugs, You pay only the Cost-Sharing in the Schedule of 
Benefits. An additional charge, called an “ancillary charge,” may apply to some 
Prescription Drugs when a Prescription Drug on a higher tier is dispensed at 
Your or Your Provider’s request and Our formulary includes a chemically 
equivalent Prescription Drug on a lower tier. You will pay the difference between 
the full cost of the Prescription Drug on the higher tier and the cost of the 
Prescription Drug on the lower tier. The cost difference is not Covered and must 
be paid by You in addition to the lower tier Cost-Sharing. If Your Provider thinks 
that a chemically equivalent Prescription Drug on a lower tier is not clinically 
appropriate, You, Your designee or Your Provider may request that We approve 
coverage at the higher tier Cost-Sharing. If approved, You will pay the higher tier 
Cost-Sharing only. If We do not approve coverage at the higher tier Cost-
Sharing, You are entitled to an Appeal as outlined in the Utilization Review and 
External Appeal sections of this Certificate. The request for an approval should 
include a statement from Your Provider that the Prescription Drug at the lower 
tier is not clinically appropriate (e.g., it will be or has been ineffective or would 
have adverse effects.) We may also request clinical documentation to support 
this statement. If We do not approve coverage for the Prescription Drug on the 
higher tier, the ancillary charge will not apply toward Your In-Network Out-of-
Pocket Limit. 
CU2425-01
60


You are responsible for paying the full cost (the amount the pharmacy charges 
You) for any non-Covered Prescription Drug, and Our contracted rates (Our 
Prescription Drug Cost) will not be available to You. 
 
Coupons and Other Financial Assistance.  We will apply any third-party 
payments, financial assistance, discounts, or other coupons that help You pay 
Your Cost-Sharing towards Your In-Network Deductible and In-Network Out-of-
Pocket Limit.   
 
This provision only applies to:  1) a Brand-Name Drug without an AB-rated 
generic equivalent, as determined by the FDA; 2) a Brand-Name Drug with an 
AB-rated generic equivalent, as determined by the FDA, and You have accessed 
the Brand-Name Drug through Preauthorization or an Appeal, including step-
therapy protocol; and 3) all Generic Drugs. 
 
2.   Participating Pharmacies.  For Prescription Drugs purchased at a retail or 
designated Participating Pharmacy, You are responsible for paying the lower of: 
• The applicable Cost-Sharing; or 
• The Prescription Drug Cost for that Prescription Drug. 
(Your Cost-Sharing will never exceed the Usual and Customary Charge of the 
Prescription Drug.) 
 
 
3.   Non-Participating Pharmacies.  If You purchase a Prescription Drug from a 
Non-Participating Pharmacy, You must pay for the Prescription Drug at the time it 
is dispensed and then file a claim for reimbursement with Us.  We will not 
reimburse You for the difference between what You pay the Non-Participating 
Pharmacy and Our price for the Prescription Drug.  In most cases, You will pay 
more if You purchase Prescription Drugs from a Non-Participating Pharmacy. 
 
 
4.   Designated Pharmacies.  If You require certain Prescription Drugs including, 
but not limited to specialty Prescription Drugs, We may direct You to a 
Designated Pharmacy with whom We have an arrangement to provide those 
Prescription Drugs.  However, We will provide benefits that apply to Prescription 
Drugs dispensed by a Designated Pharmacy to Prescription Drugs that are 
purchased from a retail pharmacy when that retail pharmacy is a Participating 
Pharmacy and agrees to the same reimbursement amount as the Designated 
Pharmacy. 
  
Generally, specialty Prescription Drugs are Prescription Drugs that are approved 
to treat limited patient populations or conditions; are normally injected, infused or 
require close monitoring by a Provider; or have limited availability, special 
dispensing and delivery requirements and/or require additional patient supports.   
  
If You are directed to a Designated Pharmacy and You choose not to obtain Your 
Prescription Drug from a Designated Pharmacy, Your coverage will be subject to 
the out-of-network benefit for that Prescription Drug. 
CU2425-01
61


 
Following are the therapeutic classes of Prescription Drugs or conditions that are 
included in this program: 
• Age related macular edema; 
• Anemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia; 
• Contraceptives; 
• Cardiovascular; 
• Crohn’s disease; 
• Cystic fibrosis; 
• Cytomegalovirus; 
• Endocrine disorders/neurologic disorders such as infantile spasms; 
• Enzyme deficiencies/liposomal storage disorders; 
• Gaucher's disease; 
• Growth hormone; 
• Hemophilia; 
• Hepatitis B, hepatitis C; 
• Hereditary angioedema; 
• HIV/AIDS; 
• Immune deficiency; 
• Immune modulator; 
• Infertility; 
• Iron overload; 
• Iron toxicity; 
• Multiple sclerosis; 
• Oncology; 
• Osteoarthritis; 
• Osteoporosis; 
• Parkinson's disease; 
• Pulmonary arterial hypertension; 
• Respiratory condition; 
• Rheumatologic and related conditions (rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic 
arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis) 
• Transplant; 
• RSV prevention. 
 
 5.  
Formulary Changes.  Our Formulary is subject to Our periodic review and 
modification.  However, a Prescription Drug will not be removed from Our 
Formulary during the Plan Year, except when the FDA determines that such 
Prescription Drug should be removed from the market.  Before We remove a 
Prescription Drug from Our Formulary at the beginning of the upcoming Plan Year, 
We will provide at least 90 days’ notice prior to the start of the Plan Year.  We will 
also post such notice on Our website at www.studenthealthbenefits.cornell.edu.  
 
CU2425-01
62


   
We will not add utilization management restrictions (e.g., step therapy or 
Preauthorization requirements) to a Prescription Drug on Our Formulary during a 
Plan Year unless the requirements are added pursuant to FDA safety concerns. 
  
 6. 
Tier Status.  A Prescription Drug will not be moved to a tier with a higher Cost-
Sharing during the Plan Year, except a Brand-Name Drug may be moved to a 
tier with higher Cost-Sharing if an AB-rated generic equivalent or interchangeable 
biological product for that Prescription Drug is added to the Formulary at the 
same time.  Additionally, a Prescription Drug may be moved to a tier with a 
higher Copayment during the Plan Year, although the change will not apply to 
You if You are already taking the Prescription Drug or You have been diagnosed 
or presented with a condition on or prior to the start of the Plan Year which is 
treated by such Prescription Drug or for which the Prescription Drug is or would 
be part of Your treatment regimen.  
 
   
Before We move a Prescription Drug to a different tier, We will provide at least 90 
days’ notice prior to the start of the Plan Year.  We will also post such notice on 
Our website at www.studenthealthbenefits.cornell.edu.  If a Prescription Drug is 
moved to a different tier during the Plan Year for one of reasons described 
above, We will provide at least 30 days’ notice before the change is effective.  
You will pay the Cost-Sharing applicable to the tier to which the Prescription Drug 
is assigned.  You may access the most up to date tier status on Our website at 
www.studenthealthbenefits.cornell.edu or by calling the number on Your ID card.   
 
7. 
Formulary Exception Process.  If a Prescription Drug is not on Our Formulary 
You, Your designee or Your prescribing Health Care Professional may request a 
Formulary exception for a clinically-appropriate Prescription Drug in writing, 
electronically or telephonically.  The request should include a statement from 
Your prescribing Health Care Professional that all Formulary drugs will be or 
have been ineffective, would not be as effective as the non-Formulary drug, or 
would have adverse effects. If coverage is denied under Our standard or 
expedited Formulary exception process, You are entitled to an external appeal as 
outlined in the External Appeal section of this Certificate. Visit Our website at 
www.optumrx.com or call the number on Your ID card to find out more about this 
process. 
 
 
Standard Review of a Formulary Exception.  We will make a decision and 
notify You or Your designee and the prescribing Health Care Professional by 
telephone and in writing no later than 72 hours after Our receipt of Your request.  
If We approve the request, We will Cover the Prescription Drug while You are 
taking the Prescription Drug, including any refills.  
 
 
Expedited Review of a Formulary Exception. If You are suffering from a health 
condition that may seriously jeopardize Your health, life or ability to regain 
maximum function or if You are undergoing a current course of treatment using a 
non-Formulary Prescription Drug, You may request an expedited review of a 
CU2425-01
63


Formulary exception. The request should include a statement from Your 
prescribing Health Care Professional that harm could reasonably come to You if 
the requested drug is not provided within the timeframes for Our standard 
Formulary exception process. We will make a decision and notify You or Your 
designee and the prescribing Health Care Professional by telephone and in 
writing no later than 24 hours after Our receipt of Your request. If We approve the 
request, We will Cover the Prescription Drug while You suffer from the health 
condition that may seriously jeopardize Your health, life or ability to regain 
maximum function or for the duration of Your current course of treatment using 
the non-Formulary Prescription Drug. 
 
8. 
Supply Limits.  Except for contraceptive drugs, devices, or products, We will 
pay for no more than a 30-day supply of a Prescription Drug purchased at a retail 
pharmacy. You are responsible for one (1) Cost-Sharing amount for up to a 30-
day supply. However, for Maintenance Drugs We will pay for up to a 90-day 
supply of a drug purchased at a retail pharmacy. You are responsible for up to 
three (3) Cost-Sharing amounts for a 90-day supply at a retail pharmacy. 
 
 
You may have the entire supply (of up to 12 months) of the contraceptive drug, 
device or product dispensed at the same time. Contraceptive drugs, devices, or 
products are not subject to Cost-Sharing when provided by a Participating 
Pharmacy. 
 
 
Specialty Prescription Drugs may be limited to a 30-day supply when obtained at 
a retail pharmacy. You may access Our website www.optumrx.com or by calling 
the number on Your ID card for more information on supply limits for specialty 
Prescription Drugs. 
 
 
Some Prescription Drugs may be subject to quantity limits based on criteria that 
We have developed, subject to Our periodic review and modification. The limit 
may restrict the amount dispensed per Prescription Order or Refill and/or the 
amount dispensed per month’s supply. You can determine whether a 
Prescription Drug has been assigned a maximum quantity level for dispensing by 
accessing Our website or by calling the number on Your ID card. If We deny a 
request to Cover an amount that exceeds Our quantity level, You are entitled to 
an Appeal pursuant to the Utilization Review and External Appeal sections of this 
Certificate. 
 
9.  
Initial Limited Supply of Prescription Opioid Drugs.  If you receive an initial 
limited prescription for a seven (7) day supply or less of any schedule II, III, or IV 
 
opioid prescribed for Acute pain, and You have a Copayment, Your Copayment 
will be the same Copayment that would apply to a 30-day supply of the 
Prescription Drug. If You receive an additional supply of the Prescription Drug 
within the same 30-day period in which You received the seven (7) day supply, 
You will not be responsible for an additional Copayment for the remaining 30-day 
supply of that Prescription Drug. 
 
CU2425-01
64


10. Emergency Refill During a State Disaster Emergency.  If a state disaster 
emergency is declared, You, Your designee, or Your Health Care Provider on 
Your behalf, may immediately get a 30-day Refill of a Prescription Drug You are 
currently taking.  You will pay the Cost-Sharing that applies to a 30-day Refill.  
Certain Prescription Drugs, as determined by the New York Commissioner of 
Health are not eligible for this emergency Refill, including schedule II and III 
controlled substances.   
 
11. Cost-Sharing for Orally-Administered Anti-Cancer Drugs.  Your Cost-Sharing 
for orally-administered anti-cancer drugs is at least as favorable to You as the 
Cost-Sharing amount, if any, that applies to intravenous or injected anticancer 
medications Covered under the Outpatient and Professional Services section of 
this Certificate. 
 
  
D.  Medical Management. 
This Certificate includes certain features to determine when Prescription Drugs should 
be Covered, which are described below. As part of these features, Your prescribing 
Provider may be asked to give more details before We can decide if the Prescription 
Drug is Medically Necessary.  
 
1. Preauthorization.  Preauthorization may be needed for certain Prescription 
Drugs to make sure proper use and guidelines for Prescription Drug coverage 
are followed.  When appropriate, Your Provider will be responsible for obtaining 
Preauthorization for the Prescription Drug.  Should You choose to purchase the 
Prescription Drug without obtaining Preauthorization, You must pay for the cost 
of the entire Prescription Drug and submit a claim to Us for reimbursement.  
Preauthorization is not required for Covered medications to treat substance use 
disorder, including opioid overdose reversal medications prescribed or dispensed 
to You.  
 
For a list of Prescription Drugs that need Preauthorization, please visit Our 
website at studenthealthbenefits.cornell.edu.  The list will be reviewed and 
updated from time to time.  We also reserve the right to require Preauthorization 
for any new Prescription Drug on the market. However, We will not add 
Preauthorization requirements to a Prescription Drug on Our Formulary during a 
plan Year unless the requirements are added pursuant to FDA safety concerns.  
Your Provider may check with Us to find out which Prescription Drugs are 
Covered. 
 
2.  Step Therapy.  Step therapy is a process in which You may need to use one (1) 
or more types of Prescription Drugs before We will Cover another as Medically 
Necessary.  A “step therapy protocol” means Our policy, protocol or program that 
establishes the sequence in which We approve Prescription Drugs for Your 
medical condition.  When establishing a step therapy protocol, We will use 
recognized evidence-based and peer reviewed clinical review criteria that also 
takes into account the needs of atypical patient populations and diagnoses.  We 
check certain Prescription Drugs to make sure that proper prescribing guidelines 
CU2425-01
65


are followed.  These guidelines help You get high quality and cost-effective 
Prescription Drugs.  The Prescription Drugs that require Preauthorization under 
the step therapy program are also included on the Preauthorization drug list.  If a 
step therapy protocol is applicable to Your request for coverage of a Prescription 
Drug, You, Your designee, or Your Health Care Professional can request a step 
therapy override determination as outlined in the Utilization Review section of this 
Certificate.  We will not add step therapy requirements to a Prescription Drug on 
Our Formulary during a Plan Year unless the requirements are added pursuant 
to FDA safety concerns. 
 
2.  Therapeutic Substitution.  Therapeutic substitution is an optional program that  
tells You and Your Providers about alternatives to certain prescribed drugs.  We 
may contact You and Your Provider to make You aware of these choices.  Only 
You and Your Provider can determine if the therapeutic substitute is right for You.  
We have a therapeutic drug substitutes list, which We review and update from 
time to time.  For questions or issues about therapeutic drug substitutes, visit Our 
website at www.optumrx.com or call the number on Your ID card. 
 
E.  Limitations/Terms of Coverage. 
1. We reserve the right to limit quantities, day supply, early Refill access and/or 
duration of therapy for certain medications based on Medical Necessity including 
acceptable medical standards and/or FDA recommended guidelines. 
 
2. If We determine that You may be using a Prescription Drug in a harmful or 
abusive manner, or with harmful frequency, Your selection of Participating 
Pharmacies and prescribing Providers may be limited.  If this happens, We may 
require You to select a single Participating Pharmacy and a single Provider that 
will provide and coordinate all future pharmacy services.  Benefits will be paid 
only if You use the selected single Participating Pharmacy.  Benefits will be paid 
only if Your Prescription Order or Refills are written by the selected Provider or a 
Provider authorized by Your selected provider. If You do not make a selection 
within 31 days of the date We notify You, We will select a single Participating 
Pharmacy and/or prescribing Provider for You. 
 
3. Compounded Prescription Drugs will be Covered only when the primary 
ingredient is a Covered legend Prescription Drug, and are obtained from a 
pharmacy that is approved for compounding.  All compounded Prescription 
Drugs over $200 require Your Provider to obtain Preauthorization.  Compounded 
Prescription Drugs are on tier 3. 
 
4. Various specific and/or generalized “use management” protocols will be used 
from time to time in order to ensure appropriate utilization of medications.  Such 
protocols will be consistent with standard medical/drug treatment guidelines.  The 
primary goal of the protocols is to provide Our Members with a quality-focused 
Prescription Drug benefit.  In the event a use management protocol is 
CU2425-01
66


implemented, and You are taking the drug(s) affected by the protocol, You will be 
notified in advance. 
 
5. Injectable drugs (other than self-administered injectable drugs) are not Covered 
under this section but are Covered under other sections of this Certificate.  Your 
benefit for diabetic insulin, oral hypoglycemics, and diabetic Prescription Drugs, 
diabetic supplies, and equipment will be provided under this section of the 
Certificate if the Cost-Sharing is more favorable to You under this section of the 
Certificate than the Additional Benefits, Equipment and Devices section of this 
Certificate. 
 
6. We do not Cover charges for the administration or injection of any Prescription 
Drug.  Prescription Drugs given or administered in a Physician’s office are 
Covered under the Outpatient and Professional Services section of this 
Certificate. 
 
7. We do not Cover drugs that do not by law require a prescription, except for 
smoking cessation drugs, over-the-counter preventive drugs or devices provided 
in accordance with the comprehensive guidelines supported by HRSA or with an 
“A” or “B” rating from USPSTF, or as otherwise provided in this Certificate.  We 
do not Cover Prescription Drugs that have over-the-counter non-prescription 
equivalents, except if specifically designated as Covered in the drug Formulary.  
Non-prescription equivalents are drugs available without a prescription that have 
the same name/chemical entity as their prescription counterparts.  We do not 
Cover repackaged products such as therapeutic kits or convenience packs that 
contain a Covered Prescription Drug unless the Prescription Drug is only 
available as part of a therapeutic kit or convenience pack.  Therapeutic kits or 
convenience packs contain one or more Prescription Drug(s) and may be 
packaged with over-the-counter items, such as gloves, finger cots, hygienic 
wipes or topical emollients. 
 
 
8. We do not Cover Prescription Drugs to replace those that may have been lost or 
stolen. 
 
9. We do not Cover Prescription Drugs dispensed to You while in a Hospital, 
nursing home, other institution, Facility, or if You are a home care patient, except 
in those cases where the basis of payment by or on behalf of You to the Hospital, 
nursing home, Home Health Agency or home care services agency, or other 
institution, does not include services for drugs.  
 
10. We reserve the right to deny benefits as not Medically Necessary or experimental 
or investigational for any drug prescribed or dispensed in a manner contrary to 
standard medical practice.  If coverage is denied, You are entitled to an Appeal 
as described in the Utilization Review and External Appeal sections of this 
Certificate. 
 
CU2425-01
67


11. A pharmacy need not dispense a Prescription Order that, in the pharmacist’s 
professional judgment, should not be filled.   
 
F.  General Conditions. 
1. You must show Your ID card to a retail pharmacy at the time You obtain Your 
Prescription Drug or You must provide the pharmacy with identifying information 
that can be verified by Us during regular business hours.   
 
2. Drug Utilization, Cost Management and Rebates.  We conduct various 
utilization management activities designed to ensure appropriate Prescription 
Drug usage, to avoid inappropriate usage, and to encourage the use of cost-
effective drugs.  Through these efforts, You benefit by obtaining appropriate 
Prescription Drugs in a cost-effective manner.  The cost savings resulting from 
these activities are reflected in the Premiums for Your coverage. 
   
We may also, from time to time, enter into agreements that result in Us receiving 
rebates or other funds (“rebates”) directly or indirectly from Prescription Drug 
manufacturers, Prescription Drug distributors or others. Any rebates are based 
upon utilization of Prescription Drugs across all of Our business and not solely on 
any one Member’s utilization of Prescription Drugs. Any rebates received by Us 
may or may not be applied, in whole or part, to reduce premiums either through 
an adjustment to claims costs or as an adjustment to the administrative expenses 
component of Our Prescription Drug premiums. Any such rebates may be 
retained by Us, in whole or part, in order to fund such activities as new utilization 
management activities, community benefit activities and increasing reserves for 
the protection of Members. Rebates will not change or reduce the amount of any 
Copayment or Coinsurance applicable under Our Prescription Drug coverage. 
 
G.  Definitions. 
Terms used in this section are defined as follows.  (Other defined terms can be found in 
the Definitions section of this Certificate).  
1. Brand-Name Drug:  A Prescription Drug that: 1) is manufactured and 
marketed under a trademark or name by a specific drug manufacturer; or 2) We 
identify as a Brand-Name Prescription Drug, based on available data resources.  
All Prescription Drugs identified as “brand name” by the manufacturer, pharmacy, 
or Your Physician may not be classified as a Brand-Name Drug by Us. 
 
2. Designated Pharmacy:  A pharmacy that has entered into an agreement with 
Us or with an organization contracting on Our behalf, to provide specific 
Prescription Drugs, including but not limited to, specialty Prescription Drugs.  The 
fact that a pharmacy is a Participating Pharmacy does not mean that it is a 
Designated Pharmacy. 
 
3. Formulary:  The list that identifies those Prescription Drugs for which coverage 
may be available under this Certificate.  To determine which tier a particular 
CU2425-01
68


Prescription Drug has been assigned visit Our website at www.optumrx.com or 
call the number on Your ID card. 
4. Generic Drug:  A Prescription Drug that: 1) is chemically equivalent to a Brand-
Name Drug; or 2) We identify as a Generic Prescription Drug based on available
data resources.  All Prescription Drugs identified as “generic” by the
manufacturer, pharmacy or Your Physician may not be classified as a Generic
Drug by Us.
5. Maintenance Drug:  A Prescription Drug used to treat a condition that is
considered chronic or long-term and which usually requires daily use of
Prescription Drugs.
6. Non-Participating Pharmacy:  A pharmacy that has not entered into an
agreement with Us to provide Prescription Drugs to Members.  We will not make
any payment for prescriptions or Refills filled at a Non-Participating Pharmacy
other than as described above.
7. Participating Pharmacy:  A pharmacy that has:
•
Entered into an agreement with Us or Our designee to provide
Prescription Drugs to Members;
•
Agreed to accept specified reimbursement rates for dispensing
Prescription Drugs; and
•
Been designated by Us as a Participating Pharmacy.
8. Prescription Drug:  A medication, product or device that has been approved by
the FDA and that can, under federal or state law, be dispensed only pursuant to
a Prescription Order or Refill and is on Our Formulary.  A Prescription Drug
includes a medication that, due to its characteristics, is appropriate for self
administration or administration by a non-skilled caregiver.
9. Prescription Drug Cost:  The amount, including a dispensing fee and any sales
tax, as contracted between Us and Our pharmacy benefit manager for a Covered
Prescription Drug dispensed at a Participating Pharmacy.  If Your Certificate
includes coverage at Non-Participating Pharmacies, the Prescription Drug Cost
for a Prescription Drug dispensed at a Non-Participating Pharmacy is calculated
using the Prescription Drug Cost that applies for that particular Prescription Drug
at most Participating Pharmacies.
10. Prescription Order or Refill:  The directive to dispense a Prescription Drug
issued by a duly licensed Health Care Professional who is acting within the
scope of his or her practice.
11. Usual and Customary Charge:  The usual fee that a pharmacy charges
individuals for a Prescription Drug without reference to reimbursement to the
pharmacy by third parties as required by New York Education Law Section 6826-a.
CU2425-01
69


SECTION XIV 
 
Wellness Benefits 
 
A.  Exercise Facility Reimbursement. 
We will partially reimburse the Student and the Student’s covered Spouse for certain 
exercise facility fees or membership fees but only if such fees are paid to exercise 
facilities which maintain equipment and programs that promote cardiovascular wellness.   
 
Reimbursement is limited to actual workout visits.  We do not reimburse: 
• Memberships in tennis clubs, country clubs, weight loss clinics, spas or any other 
similar facilities;    
• Lifetime memberships; 
• Equipment, clothing, vitamins or other services that may be offered by the facility 
(e.g., massages, etc.); or 
• Services that are amenitities, such as a gym, that are included in Your rent or 
homeonwers association fees.  
 
In order to be eligible for reimbursement, You must: 
• Be an active member of the exercise facility; and 
• Complete 50 visits in a six (6)-month period. 
 
In order to obtain reimbursement, at the end of the six (6)-month period, You must 
submit:  
• Documentation of the visits from the facility. Only one visit per day counts. All 
visits must be able to be verified from the facility attended. 
• A copy of Your current facility bill which shows the fee paid for Your membership. 
 
Once We receive documentation of the visits and the bill, You will be reimbursed the 
lesser of $200 for the Student and $100 for the Student’s covered Spouse or the actual 
cost of the membership per six (6)-month period. Reimbursement must be requested 
within 120 days of the end of the six (6)-month period. Reimbursement will be issued 
only after You have completed each six (6)-month period even if 50 visits are completed 
sooner. 
CU2425-01
70


SECTION XV 
 
Pediatric Vision Care 
 
Please refer to the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate for Cost-Sharing 
requirements, day or visit limits and any Preauthorization or Referral requirements that 
apply to these benefits.   
 
A.  Pediatric Vision Care.   
We Cover emergency, preventive and routine vision care for Members through the end 
of the month in which the Member turns 19 years of age. 
 
B.  Pediatric Vision Examinations.   
We Cover vision examinations for the purpose of determining the need for corrective 
lenses, and if needed, to provide a prescription for corrective lenses.  We Cover a vision 
examination one (1) time in any 12 month period, unless more frequent examinations 
are Medically Necessary as evidenced by appropriate documentation.  The vision 
examination may include, but is not limited to: 
• Case history; 
• External examination of the eye or internal examination of the eye; 
• Ophthalmoscopic exam; 
• Determination of refractive status; 
• Binocular distance; 
• Tonometry tests for glaucoma; 
• Gross visual fields and color vision testing; and 
• Summary findings and recommendation for corrective lenses. 
 
C.  Pediatric Prescribed Lenses and Frames.   
We Cover standard prescription lenses or contact lenses  one (1) time in any 12-month 
period, unless it is Medically Necessary for You to have new lenses or contact lenses 
more frequently, as evidenced by appropriate documentation.  Prescription lenses may 
be constructed of either glass or plastic.  If You choose non-standard lenses, We will 
pay the amount that We would have paid for standard lenses and You will be 
responsible for the difference in cost between the standard lenses and the non-standard 
lenses. The difference in cost does not apply toward Your Out-of-Pocket Limit. 
 
We also Cover standard frames adequate to hold lenses one (1) time in any 12 month 
period, unless it is Medically Necessary for You to have new frames more frequently, as 
evidenced by appropriate documentation.  If You choose a non-standard frame, We will 
pay the amount that We would have paid for a standard frame and You will be 
responsible for the difference in cost between the standard frame and the non-standard 
frame.  The difference in cost does not apply toward Your Out-of-Pocket Limit. 
CU2425-01
71


SECTION XVI 
 
Pediatric Dental Care 
 
Please refer to the Schedule of Benefits section of this Certificate for Cost-Sharing 
requirements, day or visit limits, and any Preauthorization or Referral requirements that 
apply to these benefits.   
 
We Cover the following dental care services for Members through the end of the month 
in which the Member turns 19 years of age:   
 
A. Emergency Dental Care.  We Cover emergency dental care, which includes 
emergency dental treatment required to alleviate pain and suffering caused by 
dental disease or trauma.  Emergency dental care is not subject to Our 
Preauthorization. 
 
B. Preventive Dental Care.  We Cover preventive dental care that includes procedures 
which help to prevent oral disease from occurring, including: 
• Prophylaxis (scaling and polishing the teeth) at six (6) month intervals; 
• Topical fluoride application at six (6) month intervals where the local water 
supply is not fluoridated;  
• Sealants on unrestored permanent molar teeth; and 
• Unilateral or bilateral space maintainers for placement in a restored 
deciduous and/or mixed dentition to maintain space for normally developing 
permanent teeth. 
 
C. Routine Dental Care.  We Cover routine dental care provided in the office of a 
dentist, including: 
• Dental examinations, visits and consultations once within a six (6) month 
consecutive period (when primary teeth erupt); 
• X-rays, full mouth x-rays or panoramic x-rays at 36-month intervals, bitewing 
x-rays at six (6) month intervals, and other x-rays if Medically Necessary 
(once primary teeth erupt); 
• Procedures for simple extractions and other routine dental surgery not 
requiring Hospitalization, including preoperative care and postoperative care; 
• In-office conscious sedation; 
• Amalgam, composite restorations and stainless steel crowns; and  
• Other restorative materials appropriate for children. 
 
D. Endodontics.  We Cover routine endodontic services, including procedures for 
treatment of diseased pulp chambers and pulp canals, where Hospitalization is not 
required. 
 
E. Periodontics.  We Cover limited periodontic services.  We Cover non-surgical 
periodontic services.  We Cover periodontic surgical services necessary for 
treatment related to hormonal disturbances, drug therapy, or congenital defects.  We 
CU2425-01
72


also Cover periodontic services in anticipation of, or leading to orthodontics that are 
otherwise Covered under this Certificate.   
 
F. Prosthodontics.  We Cover prosthodontic services as follows: 
• Removable complete or partial dentures for Members 15 years of age and 
above, including six (6) months follow-up care;  
• Additional services including insertion of identification slips, repairs, relines 
and rebases and treatment of cleft palate; and 
• Interim prosthesis for Members five (5) to 15 years of age. 
We do not Cover implants or implant related services.    
 
Fixed bridges are not Covered unless they are required: 
• For replacement of a single upper anterior (central/lateral incisor or cuspid) in 
a patient with an otherwise full complement of natural, functional and/or 
restored teeth; 
• For cleft palate stabilization; or  
• Due to the presence of any neurologic or physiologic condition that would 
preclude the placement of a removable prosthesis, as demonstrated by 
medical documentation. 
 
G. Oral Surgery.  We Cover non-routine oral surgery, such as partial and complete 
bony extractions, tooth re-implantation, tooth transplantation, surgical access of an 
unerupted tooth, mobilization of erupted or malpositioned tooth to aid eruption, and 
placement of device to facilitate eruption of an impacted tooth.  We also Cover oral 
surgery in anticipation of or leading to orthodontics that are otherwise Covered under 
this Certificate.  
 
H. Orthodontics.  We Cover orthodontics used to help restore oral structures to health 
and function and to treat serious medical conditions such as:  cleft palate and cleft 
lip; maxillary/mandibular micrognathia (underdeveloped upper or lower jaw); extreme 
mandibular prognathism; severe asymmetry (craniofacial anomalies); ankylosis of 
the temporomandibular joint; and other significant skeletal dysplasias.   
 
Procedures include but are not limited to:   
• Rapid Palatal Expansion (RPE); 
• Placement of component parts (e.g. brackets, bands); 
• Interceptive orthodontic treatment;  
• Comprehensive orthodontic treatment (during which orthodontic appliances 
are placed for active treatment and periodically adjusted); 
• Removable appliance therapy; and 
• Orthodontic retention (removal of appliances, construction and placement of 
retainers).   
CU2425-01
73


SECTION XVII 
 
Exclusions and Limitations 
 
No coverage is available under this Certificate for the following:  
 
A.  Aviation.   
We do not Cover services arising out of aviation, other than as a fare-paying passenger 
on a scheduled or charter flight operated by a scheduled airline. 
 
B.  Convalescent and Custodial Care.   
We do not Cover services related to rest cures, custodial care or transportation.  
“Custodial care” means help in transferring, eating, dressing, bathing, toileting and other 
such related activities.  Custodial care does not include Covered Services determined to 
be Medically Necessary. 
 
C.  Conversion Therapy. 
We do not Cover conversion therapy.  Conversion therapy is any practice by a mental 
health professional that seeks to change the sexual orientation or gender identity of a 
Member under 18 years of age, including efforts to change behaviors, gender 
expressions, or to eliminate or reduce sexual or romantic attractions or feelings toward 
individuals of the same sex.  Conversion therapy does not include counseling or therapy 
for an individual who is seeking to undergo a gender transition or who is in the process 
of undergoing a gender transition, that provides acceptance, support and understanding 
of an individual or the facilitation of an individual’s coping, social support, and identity 
exploration and development, including sexual orientation-neutral interventions to 
prevent or address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual practices, provided that the 
counseling or therapy does not seek to change sexual orientation or gender identity.  
 
D.  Cosmetic Services.   
We do not Cover cosmetic services, Prescription Drugs, or surgery, unless otherwise 
specified, except that cosmetic surgery shall not include reconstructive surgery when 
such service is incidental to or follows surgery resulting from trauma, infection or 
diseases of the involved part, and reconstructive surgery because of congenital disease 
or anomaly of a covered Child which has resulted in a functional defect.   We also Cover 
services in connection with reconstructive surgery following a mastectomy, as provided 
elsewhere in this Certificate.  Cosmetic surgery does not include surgery determined to 
be Medically Necessary.  If a claim for a procedure listed in 11 NYCRR 56 (e.g., certain 
plastic surgery and dermatology procedures) is submitted retrospectively and without 
medical information, any denial will not be subject to the Utilization Review process in 
the Utilization Review and External Appeal sections of this Certificate unless medical 
information is submitted. 
 
E.  Dental Services.   
We do not Cover dental services except for: care or treatment due to accidental injury to 
sound natural teeth within 12 months of the accident; dental care or treatment 
CU2425-01
74


necessary due to congenital disease or anomaly; or dental care or treatment specifically 
stated in the Outpatient and Professional Services and Pediatric Dental Care sections of 
this Certificate. 
 
F.  Experimental or Investigational Treatment.   
We do not Cover any health care service, procedure, treatment, device or Prescription 
Drug that is experimental or investigational.  However, We will Cover experimental or 
investigational treatments, including treatment for Your rare disease or patient costs for 
Your participation in a clinical trial as described in the Outpatient and Professional 
Services section of this Certificate, when Our denial of services is overturned by an 
External Appeal Agent certified by the State.  However, for clinical trials, We will not 
Cover the costs of any investigational drugs or devices, non-health services required for 
You to receive the treatment, the costs of managing the research, or costs that would 
not be Covered under this Certificate for non-investigational treatments.  See the 
Utilization Review and External Appeal sections of this Certificate for a further 
explanation of Your Appeal rights. 
 
G.  Felony Participation.   
We do not Cover any illness, treatment or medical condition due to Your participation in 
a felony, riot or insurrection.  This exclusion does not apply to Coverage for services 
involving injuries suffered by a victim of an act of domestic violence or for services as a 
result of Your medical condition (including both physical and mental health conditions). 
 
H.  Foot Care.   
We do not Cover routine foot care in connection with corns, calluses, flat feet, fallen 
arches, weak feet, chronic foot strain or symptomatic complaints of the feet.  However, 
we will Cover foot care when You have a specific medical condition or disease resulting 
in circulatory deficits or areas of decreased sensation in Your legs or feet.  
 
I.  Government Facility.   
We do not Cover care or treatment provided in a Hospital that is owned or operated by 
any federal, state or other governmental entity, except as otherwise required by law 
unless You are taken to the Hospital because it is close to the place where You were 
injured or became ill and Emergency Services are provided to treat Your Emergency 
Condition. 
 
J.  Medically Necessary.   
In general, We will not Cover any health care service, procedure, treatment, test, device 
or Prescription Drug that We determine is not Medically Necessary.  If an External 
Appeal Agent certified by the State overturns Our denial, however, We will Cover the 
service, procedure, treatment, test, device or Prescription Drug for which coverage has 
been denied, to the extent that such service, procedure, treatment, test, device or 
Prescription Drug is otherwise Covered under the terms of this Certificate. 
 
 
 
CU2425-01
75


K.  Medicare or Other Governmental Program.   
We do not Cover services if benefits are provided for such services under the federal 
Medicare program or other governmental program (except Medicaid).   
 
L.  Military Service.   
We do not Cover an illness, treatment or medical condition due to service in the Armed 
Forces or auxiliary units. 
 
M.  No-Fault Automobile Insurance.   
We do not Cover any benefits to the extent provided for any loss or portion thereof for 
which mandatory automobile no-fault benefits are recovered or recoverable.  This 
exclusion applies even if You do not make a proper or timely claim for the benefits 
available to You under a mandatory no-fault policy. 
 
N.  Services Not Listed.   
We do not Cover services that are not listed in this Certificate as being Covered. 
 
O.  Services Provided by a Family Member.   
We do not Cover services performed by a covered person’s immediate family member.  
“Immediate family member” means a child, stepchild, spouse, parent, stepparent, 
sibling, stepsibling, parent-in-law, child-in-law, sibling-in-law, grandparent, grandparent’s 
spouse, grandchild, or grandchild’s spouse.  
 
P.  Services Separately Billed by Hospital Employees.   
We do not Cover services rendered and separately billed by employees of Hospitals, 
laboratories or other institutions. 
 
Q.  Services With No Charge.   
We do not Cover services for which no charge is normally made. 
 
S.  Vision Services.  
We do not Cover the examination or fitting of eyeglasses or contact lenses, except as 
specifically stated in the Pediatric Vision Care section of this Certificate. 
 
U.  War.   
We do not Cover an illness, treatment or medical condition due to war, declared or 
undeclared. 
 
V.  Workers’ Compensation.   
We do not Cover services if benefits for such services are provided under any state or 
federal Workers’ Compensation, employers’ liability or occupational disease law. 
 
 
 
CU2425-01
76


SECTION XVIII 
 
Claim Determinations 
 
A.  Claims.   
A claim is a request that benefits or services be provided or paid according to the terms 
of this Certificate.  When You receive services from a Participating Provider, You will not 
need to submit a claim form.  However, if You receive services from a Non-Participating 
Provider either You or the Provider must file a claim form with Us.  If the Non-
Participating Provider is not willing to file the claim form, You will need to file it with Us.   
 
B.  Notice of Claim.   
Claims for services must include all information designated by Us as necessary to 
process the claim, including, but not limited to: Member identification number; name; 
date of birth; date of service; type of service; the charge for each service; procedure 
code for the service as applicable; diagnosis code; name and address of the Provider 
making the charge; and supporting medical records, when necessary.  A claim that fails 
to contain all necessary information will not be accepted and must be resubmitted with 
all necessary information.  Claim forms are available from Us by calling the number on 
Your ID card or visiting Our website www.aetnastudenthealth.com.  Completed claim forms 
should be sent to the address in the How Your Coverage Works section of this 
Certificate or on Your ID card. You may also submit a claim to Us electronically by 
visiting Our website www.aetnastudenthealth.com, and logging into the member portal.  
 
C.  Timeframe for Filing Claims.   
Claims for services must be submitted to Us for payment within 120 days after You 
receive the services for which payment is being requested.  If it is not reasonably 
possible to submit a claim within the 120-day period, You must submit it as soon as 
reasonably possible.   
 
D.  Claims for Prohibited Referrals.   
We are not required to pay any claim, bill or other demand or request by a Provider for 
clinical laboratory services, pharmacy services, radiation therapy services, physical 
therapy services or x-ray or imaging services furnished pursuant to a referral prohibited 
by New York Public Health Law Section 238-a(1). 
 
E.  Claim Determinations.   
Our claim determination procedure applies to all claims that do not relate to a medical 
necessity or experimental or investigational determination.  For example, Our claim 
determination procedure applies to contractual benefit denials.  If You disagree with Our 
claim determination, You may submit a Grievance pursuant to the Grievance 
Procedures section of this Certificate. 
 
For a description of the Utilization Review procedures and Appeal process for medical 
necessity or experimental or investigational determinations, see the Utilization Review 
and External Appeal sections of this Certificate. 
CU2425-01
77


 
F.  Pre-Service Claim Determinations.   
1. A pre-service claim is a request that a service or treatment be approved before it 
has been received.  If We have all the information necessary to make a 
determination regarding a pre-service claim (e.g., a covered benefit 
determination), We will make a determination and provide notice to You (or Your 
designee) within 15 days from receipt of the claim. 
 
If We need additional information, We will request it within 15 days from receipt 
of the claim.  You will have 45 calendar days to submit the information.  If We 
receive the information within 45 days, We will make a determination and provide 
notice to You (or Your designee) in writing, within 15 days of Our receipt of the 
information.  If all necessary information is not received within 45 days, We will 
make a determination within 15 calendar days of the end of the 45-day period. 
 
2. Urgent Pre-Service Reviews.  With respect to urgent pre-service requests, if  
We have all information necessary to make a determination, We will make a 
determination and provide notice to You (or Your designee) by telephone, within 
72 hours of receipt of the request.  Written notice will follow within three (3) 
calendar days of the decision.  If We need additional information, We will request 
it within 24 hours.  You will then have 48 hours to submit the information.  We will 
make a determination and provide notice to You (or Your designee) by telephone 
within 48 hours of the earlier of Our receipt of the information or the end of the 
48-hour period.  Written notice will follow within three (3) calendar days of the 
decision. 
 
G.  Post-Service Claim Determinations. 
A post-service claim is a request for a service or treatment that You have already 
received.  If We have all information necessary to make a determination regarding a 
post-service claim, We will make a determination and notify You (or Your designee) 
within 30 calendar days of the receipt of the claim if We deny the claim in whole or in 
part.  If We need additional information, We will request it within 30 calendar days.  You 
will then have 45 calendar days to provide the information.  We will make a 
determination and provide notice to You (or Your designee) in writing within 15 calendar 
days of the earlier of Our receipt of the information or the end of the 45-day period if We 
deny the claim in whole or in part. 
 
H.  Payment of Claims.  
Where Our obligation to pay a claim is reasonably clear, We will pay the claim within 30 
days of receipt of the claim (when submitted through the internet or e-mail) and 45 days 
of receipt of the claim (when submitted through other means, including paper or fax).  If 
We request additional information, We will pay the claim within 15 days of Our 
determination that payment is due but no later than 30 days (for claims submitted 
through the internet or e-mail) or 45 days (for claims submitted through other means, 
including paper or fax) of receipt of the information.  
 
 
CU2425-01
78


SECTION XIX 
 
Grievance Procedures 
 
A.  Grievances.   
Our Grievance procedure applies to any issue not relating to a Medical Necessity or 
experimental or investigational determination by Us.  For example, it applies to 
contractual benefit denials or issues or concerns You have regarding Our administrative 
policies or access to Providers.   
 
B.  Filing a Grievance.   
You can contact Us by phone at the number on Your ID card or in writing to file a 
Grievance.  You may submit an oral Grievance in connection with a denial of a Referral 
or a covered benefit determination.  We may require that You sign a written 
acknowledgement of Your oral Grievance, prepared by Us.  You or Your designee has 
up to 180 calendar days from when You received the decision You are asking Us to 
review to file the Grievance. 
 
When We receive Your Grievance, We will mail an acknowledgment letter within 15 
business days.  The acknowledgment letter will include the name, address and 
telephone number of the person handling Your Grievance, and indicate what additional 
information, if any, must be provided. 
 
We keep all requests and discussions confidential and We will take no discriminatory 
action because of Your issue.  We have a process for both standard and expedited 
Grievances, depending on the nature of Your inquiry. 
 
You may ask that We send You electronic notification of a Grievance determination 
instead of notice in writing or by telephone.  You must tell Us in advance if You want to 
receive electronic notifications.  To opt into electronic notifications, call the number on 
Your ID card.  You can opt out of electronic notifications at any time.  
 
C.  Grievance Determination.   
Qualified personnel will review Your Grievance, or if it is a clinical matter, a licensed, 
certified or registered Health Care Professional will look into it.  We will decide the 
Grievance and notify You within the following timeframes:  
 
Expedited/Urgent Grievances: 
By phone, within the earlier of 48 hours of 
receipt of all necessary information or 72 
hours of receipt of Your Grievance.  
Written notice will be provided within 72 
hours of receipt of Your Grievance.   
  
Pre-Service Grievances:   
(A request for a service or treatment that 
has not yet been provided.) 
In writing, within 15 calendar days of 
receipt of Your Grievance.  
 
CU2425-01
79


 
Post-Service Grievances:  
(A claim for a service or treatment that 
has already been provided.) 
In writing, within 30 calendar days of 
receipt of Your Grievance 
 
 
All Other Grievances:  
(That are not in relation to a claim or 
request for a service or treatment.) 
In writing, within 30 calendar days of 
receipt of Your Grievance 
 
D.  Assistance. 
If You remain dissatisfied with Our Grievance determination, or at any other time You 
are dissatisfied, You may: 
 
Call the New York State Department of Financial Services at 1-800-342-3736 or 
write them at: 
New York State Department of Financial Services 
Consumer Assistance Unit 
One Commerce Plaza 
Albany, NY 12257 
Website:  www.dfs.ny.gov 
 
If You need assistance filing a Grievance, You may also contact the state independent 
Consumer Assistance Program at: 
Community Health Advocates 
633 Third Avenue 10th Floor  
New York, NY 10017 
Or call toll free: 1-888-614-5400, or e-mail cha@cssny.org 
Website:  www.communityhealthadvocates.org 
 
 
 
CU2425-01
80


SECTION XX 
 
Utilization Review 
 
A.  Utilization Review. 
We review health services to determine whether the services are or were Medically 
Necessary or experimental or investigational ("Medically Necessary").  This process is 
called Utilization Review.  Utilization Review includes all review activities, whether they 
take place prior to the service being performed (Preauthorization); when the service is 
being performed (concurrent); or after the service is performed (retrospective).  If You 
have any questions about the Utilization Review process, please call the number on 
Your ID card.  The toll-free telephone number is available at least 40 hours a week with 
an after-hours answering machine. 
 
Initial determinations that services are not Medically Necessary will be made by: 1) 
licensed Physicians; or 2) licensed, certified, registered or credentialed Health Care 
Professionals who are in the same profession and same or similar specialty as the 
Provider who typically manages Your medical condition or disease or provides the 
health care service under review; or 3) for mental health or substance use disorder 
treatment, licensed Physicians or licensed, certified, registered or credentialed Health 
Care Professionals who specialize in behavioral health and have experience in the 
delivery of mental health or substance use disorder courses of treatment.  Appeal 
determinations that services are not Medically Necessary will be made by: 1) licensed 
Physicians who are board certified or board eligible in the same or similar specialty as 
the Provider who typically manages Your medical condition or disease or provides the 
health care service under review; or 2) licensed, certified, registered or credentialed 
Health Care Professionals who are in the same profession and same or similar specialty 
as the Provider who typically manages Your medical condition or disease or provides 
the health care service under review; or 3) for mental health or substance use disorder 
treatment, licensed Physicians or licensed, certified, registered or credentialed Health 
Care Professionals who specialize in behavioral health and have experience in the 
delivery of mental health or substance use disorder courses of treatment.  We do not 
compensate or provide financial incentives to Our employees or reviewers for 
determining that services are not Medically Necessary.   
 
We have developed guidelines and protocols to assist Us in this process.  We will use 
evidence-based and peer reviewed clinical review criteria that are appropriate to the 
age of the patient and designated by OASAS for substance use disorder treatment or 
approved for use by OMH for mental health treatment.  Specific guidelines and 
protocols are available for Your review upon request.  For more information, call the 
number on Your ID card or visit Our website www.aetnastudenthealth.com. 
 
You may ask that We send You electronic notification of a Utilization Review 
determination instead of notice in writing or by telephone.  You must tell Us in advance 
if You want to receive electronic notifications.  To opt into electronic notifications, call 
CU2425-01
81


the number on Your ID card or visit Our website www.aetnastudenthealth.com.  You 
can opt out of electronic notifications at any time.  
 
B.  Preauthorization Reviews.   
1. Non-Urgent Preauthorization Reviews.  If We have all the information 
necessary to make a determination regarding a Preauthorization review, We will 
make a determination and provide notice to You (or Your designee) and Your 
Provider, by telephone and in writing, within three (3) business days of receipt of 
the request. 
 
If We need additional information, We will request it within three (3) business 
days.  You or Your Provider will then have 45 calendar days to submit the 
information.  If We receive the requested information within 45 days, We will 
make a determination and provide notice to You (or Your designee) and Your 
Provider, by telephone and in writing, within three (3) business days of Our 
receipt of the information.  If all necessary information is not received within 45 
days, We will make a determination within 15 calendar days of the earlier of the 
receipt of part of the requested information or the end of the 45-day period. 
 
2. Urgent Preauthorization Reviews.  With respect to urgent Preauthorization 
requests, if We have all information necessary to make a determination, We will 
make a determination and provide notice to You (or Your designee) and Your 
Provider, by telephone within 72 hours of receipt of the request.  Written notice 
will be provided within three (3) business days of receipt of the request.  If We 
need additional information, We will request it within 24 hours.  You or Your 
Provider will then have 48 hours to submit the information.  We will make a 
determination and provide notice to You (or Your designee) and Your Provider by 
telephone and in writing within 48 hours of the earlier of Our receipt of the 
information or the end of the 48-hour period.   
 
3. Court Ordered Treatment. With respect to requests for mental health and/or 
substance use disorder services that have not yet been provided, if You (or Your 
designee) certify, in a format prescribed by the Superintendent of Financial 
Services, that You will be appearing, or have appeared, before a court of 
competent jurisdiction and may be subject to a court order requiring such 
services, We will make a determination and provide notice to You (or Your 
designee) and Your Provider by telephone within 72 hours of receipt of the 
request.  Written notification will be provided within three (3) business days of 
Our receipt of the request.  Where feasible, the telephonic and written notification 
will also be provided to the court. 
 
4.  Inpatient Rehabilitation Services Review.  After receiving a Preauthorization 
request for coverage of inpatient rehabilitation services following an inpatient 
Hospital admission provided by a Hospital or skilled nursing facility, We will make 
a determination and provide notice to You (or Your designee) and Your Provider, 
CU2425-01
82


by telephone and in writing, within one (1) business day of receipt of the 
necessary information. 
 
5.  Crisis Stabilization Centers.  Coverage for services provided at participating 
crisis stabilization centers licensed under New York Mental Hygiene Law section 
36.01 is not subject to Preauthorization.  We may review the treatment provided 
at crisis stabilization centers retrospectively to determine whether it is Medically 
Necessary and We will use clinical review tools designated by OASAS or 
approved by OMH.  If any treatment at a participating crisis stabilization center is 
denied as not Medically Necessary, You are only responsible for the In-Network 
Cost-Sharing that would otherwise apply to Your treatment.   
 
6. Preauthorization for Rabies Treatment.  Post-exposure rabies treatment 
authorized by a county health authority is sufficient to be considered 
Preauthorized by Us.  
 
C.  Concurrent Reviews. 
1. Non-Urgent Concurrent Reviews.  Utilization Review decisions for services 
during the course of care (concurrent reviews) will be made, and notice provided 
to You (or Your designee), by telephone and in writing, within one (1) business 
day of receipt of all necessary information.  If We need additional information, We 
will request it within one (1) business day.  You or Your Provider will then have 
45 calendar days to submit the information.  We will make a determination and 
provide notice to You (or Your designee), by telephone and in writing, within one 
(1) business day of Our receipt of the information or, if We do not receive the 
information, within the earlier of 15 calendar days of the receipt of part of the 
requested information or 15 calendar days of the end of the 45-day period.   
 
2. Urgent Concurrent Reviews.  For concurrent reviews that involve an extension 
of urgent care, if the request for coverage is made at least 24 hours prior to the 
expiration of a previously approved treatment, We will make a determination and 
provide notice to You (or Your designee) and Your Provider by telephone within 
24 hours of receipt of the request.  Written notice will be provided within one (1) 
business day of receipt of the request.  
 
If the request for coverage is not made at least 24 hours prior to the expiration of 
a previously approved treatment and We have all the information necessary to 
make a determination, We will make a determination and provide written notice 
to You (or Your designee) and Your Provider within the earlier of 72 hours or one 
(1) business day of receipt of the request.  If We need additional information, We 
will request it within 24 hours.  You or Your Provider will then have 48 hours to 
submit the information.  We will make a determination and provide written notice 
to You (or Your designee) and Your Provider within the earlier of one (1) 
business day or 48 hours of Our receipt of the information or, if we do not receive 
the information, within 48 hours of the end of the 48-hour period. 
 
CU2425-01
83


3. Inpatient Substance Use Disorder Treatment Reviews.  If a request for 
inpatient substance use disorder treatment is submitted to Us at least 24 hours 
prior to discharge from an inpatient substance use disorder treatment admission, 
We will make a determination within 24 hours of receipt of the request and We 
will provide coverage for the inpatient substance use disorder treatment while 
Our determination is pending. 
 
4.  Inpatient Mental Health Treatment for Members under 18 at Participating 
Hospitals Licensed by the Office of Mental Health (OMH). Coverage for 
inpatient mental health treatment at a participating OMH-licensed Hospital is not 
subject to Preauthorization. Coverage will not be subject to concurrent review for 
the first 14 days of the inpatient admission if the OMH-licensed Hospital notifies 
Us of both the admission and the initial treatment plan within two (2) business 
days of the admission. After the first 14 days of the inpatient admission, We may 
review the entire stay to determine whether it is Medically Necessary, and We 
will use clinical review tools approved by OMH. If any portion of the stay is 
denied as not Medically Necessary, You are only responsible for the In-Network 
Cost-Sharing that would otherwise apply to Your inpatient admission.  
 
5. Inpatient Substance Use Disorder Treatment at Participating OASAS-
Certified Facilities.  Coverage for inpatient substance use disorder treatment at 
a participating OASAS-certified Facility is not subject to Preauthorization.  
Coverage will not be subject to concurrent review for the first 28 days of the 
inpatient admission if the OASAS-certified Facility notifies Us of both the 
admission and the initial treatment plan within two (2) business days of the 
admission.  After the first 28 days of the inpatient admission, We may review the 
entire stay to determine whether it is Medically Necessary and We will use 
clinical review tools designated by OASAS.  If any portion of the stay is denied as 
not Medically Necessary, You are only responsible for the In-Network Cost-
Sharing that would otherwise apply to Your inpatient admission.  
 
6.  Outpatient Substance Use Disorder Treatment at Participating OASAS-
Certified Facilities.  Coverage for outpatient, intensive outpatient, outpatient 
rehabilitation and opioid treatment at a participating OASAS-certified Facility is 
not subject to Preauthorization.  Coverage will not be subject to concurrent 
review for the first four (4) weeks of continuous treatment, not to exceed 28 visits, 
if the OASAS-certified Facility notifies Us of both the start of treatment and the 
initial treatment plan within two (2) business days.  After the first four (4) weeks of 
continuous treatment, not to exceed 28 visits, We may review the entire 
outpatient treatment to determine whether it is Medically Necessary and We will 
use clinical review tools designated by OASAS.  If any portion of the outpatient 
treatment is denied as not Medically Necessary, You are only responsible for the 
In-Network Cost-Sharing that would otherwise apply to Your outpatient treatment.  
 
 
 
CU2425-01
84


D.  Retrospective Reviews. 
If We have all information necessary to make a determination regarding a retrospective 
claim, We will make a determination and notify You and Your Provider within 30 
calendar days of the receipt of the request.  If We need additional information, We will 
request it within 30 calendar days.  You or Your Provider will then have 45 calendar 
days to provide the information.  We will make a determination and provide notice to 
You and Your Provider in writing within 15 calendar days of the earlier of Our receipt of 
all or part of the requested information or the end of the 45-day period. 
 
Once We have all the information to make a decision, Our failure to make a Utilization 
Review determination within the applicable time frames set forth above will be deemed 
an adverse determination subject to an internal Appeal. 
 
E.  Retrospective Review of Preauthorized Services.  
We may only reverse a preauthorized treatment, service or procedure on retrospective 
review when:   
• The relevant medical information presented to Us upon retrospective review is 
materially different from the information presented during the Preauthorization 
review; 
• The relevant medical information presented to Us upon retrospective review 
existed at the time of the Preauthorization but was withheld or not made available 
to Us; 
• We were not aware of the existence of such information at the time of the 
Preauthorization review; and 
• Had We been aware of such information, the treatment, service or procedure 
being requested would not have been authorized.  The determination is made 
using the same specific standards, criteria or procedures as used during the 
Preauthorization review. 
 
F. Step Therapy Override Determinations. 
You, Your designee, or Your Health Care Professional may request a step therapy 
protocol override determination for Coverage of a Prescription Drug selected by Your 
Health Care Professional.  When conducting Utilization Review for a step therapy 
protocol override determination, We will use recognized evidence-based and peer 
reviewed clinical review criteria that is appropriate for You and Your medical condition. 
 
1.  Supporting Rationale and Documentation.  A step therapy protocol 
override determination request must include supporting rationale and 
documentation from a Health Care Professional, demonstrating that: 
• The required Prescription Drug(s) is contraindicated or will likely cause an 
adverse reaction or physical or mental harm to You;  
• The required Prescription Drug(s) is expected to be ineffective based on 
Your known clinical history, condition, and Prescription Drug regimen; 
• You have tried the required Prescription Drug(s) while covered by Us or 
under Your previous health insurance coverage, or another Prescription 
Drug in the same pharmacologic class or with the same mechanism of 
CU2425-01
85


action, and that Prescription Drug(s) was discontinued due to lack of 
efficacy or effectiveness, diminished effect, or an adverse event; 
• You are stable on a Prescription Drug(s) selected by Your Health Care 
Professional for Your medical condition, provided this does not prevent Us 
from requiring You to try an AB-rated generic equivalent; or 
• The required Prescription Drug(s) is not in Your best interest because it 
will likely cause a significant barrier to Your adherence to or compliance 
with Your plan of care, will likely worsen a comorbid condition, or will likely 
decrease Your ability to achieve or maintain reasonable functional ability 
in performing daily activities. 
 
2.  Standard Review.  We will make a step therapy protocol override 
determination and provide notification to You (or Your designee) and where 
appropriate, Your Health Care Professional, within 72 hours of receipt of the 
supporting rationale and documentation.  
 
3.  Expedited Review.  If You have a medical condition that places Your health 
in serious jeopardy without the Prescription Drug prescribed by Your Health 
Care Professional, We will make a step therapy protocol override 
determination and provide notification to You (or Your designee) and Your 
Health Care Professional within 24 hours of receipt of the supporting rationale 
and documentation.   
 
If the required supporting rationale and documentation are not submitted with a step 
therapy protocol override determination request, We will request the information within 
72 hours for Preauthorization and retrospective reviews, the lesser of 72 hours or one 
(1) business day for concurrent reviews, and 24 hours for expedited reviews.  You or 
Your Health Care Professional will have 45 calendar days to submit the information for 
Preauthorization, concurrent and retrospective reviews, and 48 hours for expedited 
reviews.  For Preauthorization reviews, We will make a determination and provide 
notification to You (or Your designee) and Your Health Care Professional within the 
earlier of 72 hours of Our receipt of the information or 15 calendar days of the end of the 
45-day period if the information is not received.  For concurrent reviews, We will make a 
determination and provide notification to You (or Your designee) and Your Health Care 
Professional within the earlier of 72 hours or one (1) business day of Our receipt of the 
information or 15 calendar days of the end of the 45-day period if the information is not 
received.  For retrospective reviews, We will make a determination and provide 
notification to You (or Your designee) and Your Health Care Professional within the 
earlier of 72 hours of Our receipt of the information or 15 calendar days of the end of the 
45-day period if the information is not received.  For expedited reviews, We will make a 
determination and provide notification to You (or Your designee) and Your Health Care 
Professional within the earlier of 24 hours of Our receipt of the information or 48 hours 
of the end of the 48-hour period if the information is not received. 
 
CU2425-01
86


If We do not make a determination within 72 hours (or 24 hours for expedited reviews) 
of receipt of the supporting rationale and documentation, the step therapy protocol 
override request will be approved. 
 
If We determine that the step therapy protocol should be overridden, We will authorize 
immediate coverage for the Prescription Drug prescribed by Your treating Health Care 
Professional.  An adverse step therapy override determination is eligible for an Appeal. 
 
G.  Reconsideration. 
If We did not attempt to consult with Your Provider who recommended the Covered 
Service before making an adverse determination, the Provider may request 
reconsideration by the same clinical peer reviewer who made the adverse determination 
or a designated clinical peer reviewer if the original clinical peer reviewer is unavailable.  
For Preauthorization and concurrent reviews, the reconsideration will take place within 
one (1) business day of the request for reconsideration.  If the adverse determination is 
upheld, a notice of adverse determination will be given to You and Your Provider, by 
telephone and in writing.  
 
H.  Utilization Review Internal Appeals.   
You, Your designee, and, in retrospective review cases, Your Provider, may request an 
internal Appeal of an adverse determination, either by phone or in writing. 
 
You have up to 180 calendar days after You receive notice of the adverse determination 
to file an Appeal.  We will acknowledge Your request for an internal Appeal within 15 
calendar days of receipt.  This acknowledgment will include the name, address, and 
phone number of the person handling Your Appeal and, if necessary, inform You of any 
additional information needed before a decision can be made.  The Appeal will be 
decided by a clinical peer reviewer who is not subordinate to the clinical peer reviewer 
who made the initial adverse determination and who is 1) a Physician or 2) a Health 
Care Professional in the same or similar specialty as the Provider who typically 
manages the disease or condition at issue. 
 
1. Out-of-Network Service Denial.  You also have the right to Appeal the denial of 
a Preauthorization request for an out-of-network health service when We 
determine that the out-of-network health service is not materially different from an 
available in-network health service.  A denial of an out-of-network health service 
is a service provided by a Non-Participating Provider, but only when the service 
is not available from a Participating Provider.  For a Utilization Review Appeal of 
denial of an out-of-network health service, You or Your designee must submit: 
• A written statement from Your attending Physician, who must be a licensed, 
board-certified or board-eligible Physician qualified to practice in the specialty 
area of practice appropriate to treat Your condition, that the requested out-of-
network health service is materially different from the alternate health service 
available from a Participating Provider that We approved to treat Your 
condition; and 
CU2425-01
87


• Two (2) documents from the available medical and scientific evidence that the 
out-of-network service:  1) is likely to be more clinically beneficial to You than 
the alternate in-network service; and 2) that the adverse risk of the out-of-
network service would likely not be substantially increased over the in-
network health service. 
 
2. Out-of-Network Authorization Denial.  You also have the right to Appeal the 
denial of a request for an authorization to a Non-Participating Provider when We 
determine that We have a Participating Provider with the appropriate training and 
experience to meet Your particular health care needs who is able to provide the 
requested health care service.  For a Utilization Review Appeal of an out-of-
network authorization denial, You or Your designee must submit a written 
statement from Your attending Physician, who must be a licensed, board-certified 
or board-eligible Physician qualified to practice in the specialty area of practice 
appropriate to treat Your condition:   
• That the Participating Provider recommended by Us does not have the 
appropriate training and experience to meet Your particular health care needs 
for the health care service; and 
• Recommending a Non-Participating Provider with the appropriate training and 
experience to meet Your particular health care needs who is able to provide 
the requested health care service. 
 
I.  Standard Appeal. 
1. Preauthorization Appeal.  If Your Appeal relates to a Preauthorization request, 
We will decide the Appeal within 30 calendar days of receipt of the Appeal 
request.  Written notice of the determination will be provided to You (or Your 
designee), and where appropriate, Your Provider, within two (2) business days 
after the determination is made, but no later than 30 calendar days after receipt 
of the Appeal request.   
 
2. Retrospective Appeal.  If Your Appeal relates to a retrospective claim, We will 
decide the Appeal within the earlier of 30 calendar days of receipt of the 
information necessary to conduct the Appeal or 60 days of receipt of the Appeal.  
Written notice of the determination will be provided to You (or Your designee), 
and where appropriate, Your Provider, within two (2) business days after the 
determination is made, but no later than 60 calendar days after receipt of the 
Appeal request. 
 
3. Expedited Appeal.  An Appeal of a review of continued or extended health care 
services, additional services rendered in the course of continued treatment, 
home health care services following discharge from an inpatient Hospital 
admission, services in which a Provider requests an immediate review, mental 
health and/or substance use disorder services that may be subject to a court 
order, or any other urgent matter will be handled on an expedited basis.  An 
expedited Appeal is not available for retrospective reviews.  For an expedited 
Appeal, Your Provider will have reasonable access to the clinical peer reviewer 
CU2425-01
88


assigned to the Appeal within one (1) business day of receipt of the request for 
an Appeal.  Your Provider and a clinical peer reviewer may exchange information 
by telephone or fax.  An expedited Appeal will be determined within the earlier of 
72 hours of receipt of the Appeal or two (2) business days of receipt of the 
information necessary to conduct the Appeal.  Written notice of the determination 
will be provided to You (or Your designee) within 24 hours after the determination 
is made, but no later than 72 hours after receipt of the Appeal request.  
 
Our failure to render a determination of Your Appeal within 30 calendar days of 
receipt of the necessary information for a standard Appeal or within two (2) 
business days of receipt of the necessary information for an expedited Appeal 
will be deemed a reversal of the initial adverse determination. 
 
4. Substance Use Appeal. If We deny a request for inpatient substance use 
disorder treatment that was submitted at least 24 hours prior to discharge from 
an inpatient admission, and You or Your Provider file an expedited internal 
Appeal of Our adverse determination, We will decide the Appeal within 24 hours 
of receipt of the Appeal request. If You or Your Provider file the expedited 
internal Appeal and an expedited external appeal within 24 hours of receipt of 
Our adverse determination, We will also provide coverage for the inpatient 
substance use disorder treatment while a determination on the internal Appeal 
and external appeal is pending.  
 
J.  Full and Fair Review of an Appeal. 
We will provide You, free of charge, with any new or additional evidence considered, 
relied upon, or generated by Us or any new or additional rationale in connection with Your 
Appeal.  The evidence or rationale will be provided as soon as possible and sufficiently 
in advance of the date on which the notice of final adverse determination is required to 
be provided to give You a reasonable opportunity to respond prior to that date.   
 
 
K.  Appeal Assistance.  
If You need Assistance filing an Appeal, You may contact the state independent 
Consumer Assistance Program at:  
Community Health Advocates 
633 Third Avenue 10th Floor 
New York, NY 10017 
Or call toll free: 1-888-614-5400, or e-mail cha@cssny.org 
Website:  www.communityhealthadvocates.org 
CU2425-01
89


SECTION XXI 
 
External Appeal 
 
A.  Your Right to an External Appeal. 
In some cases, You have a right to an external appeal of a denial of coverage.  If We 
have denied coverage on the basis that a service is not Medically Necessary (including 
appropriateness, health care setting, level of care or effectiveness of a Covered 
benefit); or is an experimental or investigational treatment (including clinical trials and 
treatments for rare diseases); or is an out-of-network treatment, or is an emergency 
service or a surprise bill (including whether the correct Cost-Sharing was applied), You 
or Your representative may appeal that decision to an External Appeal Agent, an 
independent third party certified by the State to conduct these appeals.    
 
In order for You to be eligible for an external appeal You must meet the following two (2) 
requirements:  
• The service, procedure, or treatment must otherwise be a Covered Service under 
this Certificate; and 
• In general, You must have received a final adverse determination through Our 
internal Appeal process.  But, You can file an external appeal even though You 
have not received a final adverse determination through Our internal Appeal 
process if: 
o We agree in writing to waive the internal Appeal.  We are not required to 
agree to Your request to waive the internal Appeal; or 
o You file an external appeal at the same time as You apply for an 
expedited internal Appeal; or  
o We fail to adhere to Utilization Review claim processing requirements 
(other than a minor violation that is not likely to cause prejudice or harm to 
You, and We demonstrate that the violation was for good cause or due to 
matters beyond Our control and the violation occurred during an ongoing, 
good faith exchange of information between You and Us). 
 
B.  Your Right to Appeal a Determination that a Service is Not Medically  
Necessary. 
If We have denied coverage on the basis that the service is not Medically Necessary, 
You may appeal to an External Appeal Agent if You meet the requirements for an 
external appeal in paragraph “A” above. 
 
C.  Your Right to Appeal a Determination that a Service is Experimental or 
Investigational. 
If We have denied coverage on the basis that the service is an experimental or 
investigational treatment (including clinical trials and treatments for rare diseases), You 
must satisfy the two (2) requirements for an external appeal in paragraph “A” above and 
Your attending Physician must certify that Your condition or disease is one for which: 
1. Standard health services are ineffective or medically inappropriate; or  
CU2425-01
90


2. There does not exist a more beneficial standard service or procedure Covered by 
Us; or  
3. There exists a clinical trial or rare disease treatment (as defined by law). 
 
In addition, Your attending Physician must have recommended one (1) of the following: 
1. A service, procedure or treatment that two (2) documents from available medical 
and scientific evidence indicate is likely to be more beneficial to You than any 
standard Covered Service (only certain documents will be considered in support 
of this recommendation – Your attending Physician should contact the State for 
current information as to what documents will be considered or acceptable); or  
2. A clinical trial for which You are eligible (only certain clinical trials can be 
considered); or  
3. A rare disease treatment for which Your attending Physician certifies that there is 
no standard treatment that is likely to be more clinically beneficial to You than the 
requested service, the requested service is likely to benefit You in the treatment 
of Your rare disease, and such benefit outweighs the risk of the service.  In 
addition, Your attending Physician must certify that Your condition is a rare 
disease that is currently or was previously subject to a research study by the 
National Institutes of Health Rare Disease Clinical Research Network or that it 
affects fewer than 200,000 U.S. residents per year.  
 
For purposes of this section, Your attending Physician must be a licensed, board-
certified or board eligible Physician qualified to practice in the area appropriate to treat 
Your condition or disease.  In addition, for a rare disease treatment, the attending 
Physician may not be Your treating Physician. 
 
D.  Your Right to Appeal a Determination that a Service is Out-of-Network. 
If We have denied coverage of an out-of-network treatment because it is not materially 
different than the health service available in-network, You may appeal to an External 
Appeal Agent if You meet the two (2) requirements for an external appeal in paragraph 
“A” above, and You have requested Preauthorization for the out-of-network treatment. 
 
In addition, Your attending Physician must certify that the out-of-network service is 
materially different from the alternate recommended in-network health service, and 
based on two (2) documents from available medical and scientific evidence, is likely to 
be more clinically beneficial than the alternate in-network treatment and that the 
adverse risk of the requested health service would likely not be substantially increased 
over the alternate in-network health service. 
 
For purposes of this section, Your attending Physician must be a licensed, board 
certified or board eligible Physician qualified to practice in the specialty area appropriate 
to treat You for the health service. 
 
E.  Your Right to Appeal an Out-of-Network Authorization Denial to a Non-
Participating Provider. 
If We have denied coverage of a request for an authorization to a Non-Participating 
Provider because We determine We have a Participating Provider with the appropriate 
CU2425-01
91


training and experience to meet Your particular health care needs who is able to provide 
the requested health care service, You may appeal to an External Appeal Agent if You 
meet the two (2) requirements for an external appeal in paragraph “A” above. 
 
In addition, Your attending Physician must: 1) certify that the Participating Provider 
recommended by Us does not have the appropriate training and experience to meet 
Your particular health care needs; and 2) recommend a Non-Participating Provider with 
the appropriate training and experience to meet Your particular health care needs who 
is able to provide the requested health care service. 
 
For purposes of this section, Your attending Physician must be a licensed, board 
certified or board eligible Physician qualified to practice in the specialty area appropriate 
to treat You for the health service. 
 
F.  Your Right to Appeal a Formulary Exception Denial. 
If We have denied Your request for coverage of a non-formulary Prescription Drug 
through Our formulary exception process, You, Your designee or the prescribing Health 
Care Professional may appeal the formulary exception denial to an External Appeal 
Agent.  See the Prescription Drug Coverage section of this Certificate for more 
information on the formulary exception process. 
 
G. The External Appeal Process. 
You have four (4) months from receipt of a final adverse determination or from receipt of 
a waiver of the internal Appeal process to file a written request for an external appeal.  If 
You are filing an external appeal based on Our failure to adhere to claim processing 
requirements, You have four (4) months from such failure to file a written request for an 
external appeal.   
 
We will provide an external appeal application with the final adverse determination 
issued through Our internal Appeal process or Our written waiver of an internal Appeal.  
You may also request an external appeal application from the New York State 
Department of Financial Services at 1-800-400-8882.  Submit the completed application 
to the Department of Financial Services at the address indicated on the application.  If 
You meet the criteria for an external appeal, the State will forward the request to a 
certified External Appeal Agent. 
 
You can submit additional documentation with Your external appeal request.  If the 
External Appeal Agent determines that the information You submit represents a material 
change from the information on which We based Our denial, the External Appeal Agent 
will share this information with Us in order for Us to exercise Our right to reconsider Our 
decision.  If We choose to exercise this right, We will have three (3) business days to 
amend or confirm Our decision.  Please note that in the case of an expedited external 
appeal (described below), We do not have a right to reconsider Our decision. 
 
In general, the External Appeal Agent must make a decision within 30 days of receipt of 
Your completed application.  The External Appeal Agent may request additional 
CU2425-01
92


information from You, Your Physician, or Us.  If the External Appeal Agent requests 
additional information, it will have five (5) additional business days to make its decision.  
The External Appeal Agent must notify You in writing of its decision within two (2) 
business days.   
 
If Your attending Physician certifies that a delay in providing the service that has been 
denied poses an imminent or serious threat to Your health; or if Your attending 
Physician certifies that the standard external appeal time frame would seriously 
jeopardize Your life, health or ability to regain maximum function; or if You received 
Emergency Services and have not been discharged from a Facility and the denial 
concerns an admission, availability of care, or continued stay, You may request an 
expedited external appeal.  In that case, the External Appeal Agent must make a 
decision within 72 hours of receipt of Your completed application.  Immediately after 
reaching a decision, the External Appeal Agent must notify You and Us by telephone or 
facsimile of that decision.  The External Appeal Agent must also notify You in writing of 
its decision.   
 
If Your internal formulary exception request received a standard review through Our 
formulary exception process, the External Appeal Agent must make a decision on Your 
external appeal and notify You or Your designee and the prescribing Health Care 
Professional by telephone within 72 hours of receipt of Your completed application.  The 
External Appeal Agent will notify You or Your designee and the prescribing Health Care 
Professional in writing within two (2) business days of making a determination. If the 
External Appeal Agent overturns Our denial, We will Cover the Prescription Drug while 
You are taking the Prescription Drug, including any refills. 
 
If Your internal formulary exception request received an expedited review through Our 
formulary exception process, the External Appeal Agent must make a decision on Your 
external appeal and notify You or Your designee and the prescribing Health Care 
Professional by telephone within 24 hours of receipt of Your completed application.  The 
External Appeal Agent will notify You or Your designee and the prescribing Health Care 
Professional in writing within 72 hours of receipt of Your completed application. If the 
External Appeal Agent overturns Our denial, We will Cover the Prescription Drug while 
You suffer from the health condition that may seriously jeopardize Your health, life or 
ability to regain maximum function or for the duration of Your current course of 
treatment using the non-formulary Prescription Drug.  
 
If the External Appeal Agent overturns Our decision that a service is not Medically 
Necessary or approves coverage of an experimental or investigational treatment or an 
out-of-network treatment, We will provide coverage subject to the other terms and 
conditions of this Certificate.  Please note that if the External Appeal Agent approves 
coverage of an experimental or investigational treatment that is part of a clinical trial, 
We will only Cover the cost of services required to provide treatment to You according 
to the design of the trial.  We will not be responsible for the costs of investigational 
drugs or devices, the costs of non-health care services, the costs of managing the 
research, or costs that would not be Covered under this Certificate for non-
CU2425-01
93


investigational treatments provided in the clinical trial. 
 
The External Appeal Agent’s decision is binding on both You and Us.  The External 
Appeal Agent’s decision is admissible in any court proceeding. 
 
H. Your Responsibilities. 
It is Your responsibility to start the external appeal process.  You may start the 
external appeal process by filing a completed application with the New York State 
Department of Financial Services.  You may appoint a representative to assist You with 
Your application; however, the Department of Financial Services may contact You and 
request that You confirm in writing that You have appointed the representative.   
 
Under New York State law, Your completed request for external appeal must be 
filed within four (4) months of either the date upon which You receive a final 
adverse determination, or the date upon which You receive a written waiver of 
any internal Appeal, or Our failure to adhere to claim processing requirements.  
We have no authority to extend this deadline. 
 
 
CU2425-01
94


 
 
SECTION XXII 
 
Termination of Coverage 
 
Coverage under this Certificate will automatically be terminated on the first of the 
following to apply:   
 
1. The Student has failed to pay Premiums within 30 days of when Premiums are 
due. Coverage will terminate as of the last day for which Premiums were paid.  
 
2. The end of the month in which the Student ceases to meet the eligibility 
requirements as defined by the Us.  We will provide written notice to the Student 
at least 30 days prior to when the coverage will cease. 
 
3. Upon the Student’s death, coverage will terminate unless the Student has 
coverage for Dependents.  If the Student has coverage for Dependents, then 
coverage will terminate as of the last day of the month for which the Premium 
has been paid. 
 
4.  For Spouses in cases of divorce, the date of the divorce. 
 
5.  For Children, until the end of the month in which the Child turns 30 years of age. 
 
6.  For all other Dependents, the end of the month in which the Dependent ceases 
to be eligible.  
 
7.  The end of the month during which the Student provides written notice to Us 
requesting termination of coverage, or on such later date requested for such 
termination by the notice. 
 
8.  If a Student or the Student’s Dependent has performed an act that constitutes 
fraud or the Student has made an intentional misrepresentation of material fact in 
writing on his or her enrollment application, or in order to obtain coverage for a 
service, coverage will terminate immediately upon written notice of termination 
delivered by Us to the Student and/or the Student’s Dependent, as applicable.  If 
termination is a result of the Student’s action, coverage will terminate for the 
Student and any Dependents. If termination is a result of the Dependent’s action, 
coverage will terminate for the Dependent. 
 
9.  If the Student makes an intentional misrepresentation of material fact in writing 
on his or her enrollment application, We will rescind coverage, after 30 days’ 
prior written notice, if the facts misrepresented would have led Us to refuse to 
issue the coverage. Rescission means that the termination of Your coverage will 
have a retroactive effect of up to Your enrollment under the Certificate. 
 
10. For such other reasons that are acceptable to the superintendent and authorized 
by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, Public Law 
CU2425-01
95


 
 
104-191, and any later amendments or successor provisions, or by any federal 
regulations or rules that implement the provisions of the Act.  
 
No termination shall prejudice the right to a claim for benefits which arose prior to such 
termination. 
 
See the Continuation of Coverage section of this Certificate for Your right to 
continuation of this coverage. 
 
Refund Policy 
If Your status as a Student changes with the University to cancel/withdraw/no-show 
within the first 31 days of a coverage period, you will not be Covered under the 
Certificate and the full premium amount paid will be refunded. After 31 days, you will be 
Covered for the full period that you have paid the premium for, and a prorated refund 
will be applied if you elect to terminate Your coverage. 
 
Refunds will not be provided within 60 days of the policy expiring or termination of 
student status (cancel/withdraw, degree complete). 
 
Exception: A Member entering the armed forces of any country will not be covered 
under the Certificate as of the date of such entry. In this case, a pro-rata refund of 
premium will be made for any such person and any Covered Dependents upon written 
request received by Us within 90 days of withdrawal from school. 
 
NOTE: If claims from any provider have been submitted and paid for any period, no full 
refund will be provided under any circumstances and the cancellation policy applies. 
CU2425-01
96


SECTION XXIII 
 
Extension of Benefits 
 
When Your coverage under this Certificate ends, benefits stop. But, if You are totally 
disabled on the date Your coverage under this Certificate terminates, continued benefits 
may be available for the treatment of the injury or sickness that is the cause of the total 
disability.  If you are pregnant on the date Your coverage under this Certificate 
terminates, continued benefits may be available for Your maternity care.  
 
For purposes of this section, “total disability” means You are prevented because of 
injury or disease from engaging in any work or other gainful activity. Total disability for a 
minor means that the minor is prevented because of injury or disease from engaging in 
substantially all of the normal activities of a person of like age and sex who is in good 
health. 
 
A. When You May Continue Benefit. 
1. If You are totally disabled on the date Your coverage under this Certificate 
terminates, We will continue to pay for Your care under this Certificate during an 
uninterrupted period of total disability until the first of the following:  
• The date You are no longer totally disabled; or 
• 90 days from the date extended benefits began (if Your benefits are extended 
based on termination of Student status). 
2. If You are pregnant on the date Your coverage under this Certificate terminates, We 
will continue to pay for Your maternity care under this Certificate through delivery 
and any post-partum services directly related to the delivery.  
 
B.  Limits on Extended Benefits. 
We will not pay extended benefits: 
• For any Member who is not totally disabled or pregnant on the date coverage 
under this Certificate ends; or 
• Beyond the extent to which We would have paid benefits under this Certificate if 
coverage had not ended. 
 
 
 
 
CU2425-01
97


SECTION XXIV 
 
Continuation of Coverage 
 
A.  Qualifying Events. 
You, the Student, Your Spouse and Your Children may be able to temporarily continue 
coverage under this Certificate in certain situations when You would otherwise lose 
coverage, known as qualifying events. 
 
1. If Your coverage ends due to the termination of Your Student status You may 
continue coverage.  Coverage may be continued for You, Your Spouse and any 
of Your covered Children.  
 
2. If You are a covered Spouse, You may continue coverage if Your coverage ends 
due to: 
• Termination of the Student’s status as a Student; 
• Divorce or legal separation from the Student; or 
• Death of the Student. 
 
3. If You are a covered Child, You may continue coverage if Your coverage ends 
due to: 
• Termination of the Student’s status as a Student; 
• Loss of covered Child status under the plan rules; or  
• Death of the Student.  
 
If You want to continue coverage, You must request continuation from Us in writing and 
make the first Premium payment within the 60-day period following the later of: 
1. The date coverage would otherwise terminate; or 
2. The date You are sent notice by first class mail of the right of continuation by Us.  
 
  Continued coverage under this section will terminate at the earliest of the following: 
1. The date 90 days after the Student’s coverage would have terminated because 
of termination of Student status; 
2. If You are a covered Spouse or Child, the date 90 days after coverage would 
have terminated due to the death of the Student, divorce or legal separation, the 
Student’s eligibility for Medicare, or the failure to qualify under the definition of 
“Children”;  
3. The date You become covered by an insured or uninsured arrangement that 
provides hospital, surgical or medical coverage; 
4. The date You become entitled to Medicare; 
5. The date to which Premiums are paid if You fail to make a timely payment; or 
 
 
CU2425-01
98


SECTION XXV 
 
Temporary Suspension Rights for Armed Forces’ Members 
 
If You, the Student, are a member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the 
United States, including the National Guard, You have the right to temporary 
suspension of coverage during active duty and reinstatement of coverage at the end of 
active duty if: 
1. Your active duty is extended during a period when the president is authorized to 
order units of the reserve to active duty, provided that such additional active duty 
is at the request and for the convenience of the federal government; and 
2. Your service ends during the Plan Year for which this Certificate is effective.  
 
You must make written request to Us to have Your coverage suspended during a period 
of active duty.  Your unearned Premiums will be refunded during the period of such 
suspension.    
 
Upon completion of active duty, Your coverage may be resumed as long as You: 
1. Make written application to Us; and  
2. Remit the Premium within 60 days of the termination of active duty.   
 
The right of resumption extends to coverage for Your Dependents.  For coverage that 
was suspended while on active duty, coverage will be retroactive to the date on which 
active duty terminated. 
 
 
CU2425-01
99


SECTION XXVI 
 
General Provisions 
 
1.  Agreements Between Us and Participating Providers.   
Any agreement between Us and Participating Providers may only be terminated by Us 
or the Providers.  This Certificate does not require any Provider to accept a Member as 
a patient.  We do not guarantee a Member’s admission to any Participating Provider or 
any health benefits program. 
 
2.  Assignment.   
You cannot assign any benefits under this Certificate or legal claims based on a denial 
of benefits or request for plan documents to any person, corporation or other 
organization and any such assignment will be void and unenforceable.  You cannot 
assign any monies due under this Certificate to any person, corporation or other 
organization. 
 
Assignment means the transfer to another person, corporation or other organization of 
Your right to the services provided under this Certificate or Your right to collect money 
from Us for those services or Your right to sue based on a denial of benefits or request 
for plan documents.  Nothing in this paragraph shall affect Your right to appoint a 
designee or representative as otherwise permitted by applicable law. 
 
3.  Choice of Law.   
This Certificate shall be governed by the laws of the State of New York.  
 
4.  Clerical Error.   
Clerical error, whether by You or Us, with respect to this Certificate, or any other 
documentation issued by Us in connection with this Certificate, or in keeping any record 
pertaining to the coverage hereunder, will not modify or invalidate coverage otherwise 
validly in force or continue coverage otherwise validly terminated.   
 
5.  Conformity with Law.  
Any term of this Certificate which is in conflict with New York State law or with any 
applicable federal law that imposes additional requirements from what is required under 
New York State law will be amended to conform with the minimum requirements of such 
law.    
 
6.  Continuation of Benefit Limitations.   
Some of the benefits in this Certificate may be limited to a specific number of visits, 
and/or subject to a Deductible.  You will not be entitled to any additional benefits if Your 
coverage status should change during the year.  For example, if Your coverage status 
changes from covered family member to Student, all benefits previously utilized when 
You were a covered family member will be applied toward Your new status as a 
Student. 
 
CU2425-01
100


7.  Entire Agreement.   
This Certificate including any endorsements, riders and the attached applications, if any, 
constitutes the entire Certificate. 
 
8.  Furnishing Information and Audit.  
All persons covered under this Certificate will promptly furnish Us with all information 
and records that We may require from time to time to perform Our obligations under this 
Certificate.  You must provide Us with information over the telephone for reasons such 
as the following: to allow Us to determine the level of care You need; so that We may 
certify care authorized by Your Physician; or to make decisions regarding the Medical 
Necessity of Your care.   
 
9.  Identification Cards.   
Identification (“ID”) cards are issued by Us for identification purposes only.  Possession 
of any ID card confers no right to services or benefits under this Certificate.  To be 
entitled to such services or benefits, Your Premiums must be paid in full at the time the 
services are sought to be received. 
 
10.  Incontestability.   
No statement made by the Student in an application for coverage under this Certificate 
shall avoid the Certificate or be used in any legal proceeding unless the application or 
an exact copy is attached to this Certificate.   
 
11.  Independent Contractors. 
Participating Providers are independent contractors.  They are not Our agents or 
employees.  We and Our employees are not the agent or employee of any Participating 
Provider.  We are not liable for any claim or demand on account of damages arising out 
of, or in any manner connected with, any injuries alleged to be suffered by You, or Your 
covered Spouse or Children while receiving care from any Participating Provider or in 
any Participating Provider's Facility. 
 
12. Input in Developing Our Policies. 
Students may participate in the development of Our policies by participating in the 
Student Health Benefit Advisory Committee or communicating with a representative of 
the Student, Graduate/Professional Student, or University Assemblies. For more 
information see: https://studenthealthbenefits.cornell.edu/about/student-health-benefits-
advisory-committee. 
 
13.  Material Accessibility.  
We will give You ID cards, Certificates, riders and other necessary materials. 
 
14.  More Information about Your Health Plan.   
You can request additional information about Your coverage under this Certificate.  
Upon Your request, We will provide the following information: 
• A list of the names, business addresses and official positions of Our board of 
directors, officers and members; and Our most recent annual certified financial 
CU2425-01
101


statement which includes a balance sheet and a summary of the receipts and 
disbursements. 
• The information that We provide the State regarding Our consumer complaints.  
• A copy of Our procedures for maintaining confidentiality of Member information. 
• A copy of Our drug formulary.  You may also inquire if a specific drug is 
Covered under this Certificate. 
• A written description of Our quality assurance program. 
• A copy of Our medical policy regarding an experimental or investigational drug, 
medical device or treatment in clinical trials.  
• Provider affiliations with participating Hospitals. 
• A copy of Our clinical review criteria (e.g., Medical Necessity criteria), and 
where appropriate, other clinical information We may consider regarding a 
specific disease, course of treatment or Utilization Review guidelines, including 
clinical review criteria relating to a step therapy protocol override determination. 
• Written application procedures and minimum qualification requirements for 
Providers. 
• Documents that contain the processes, strategies evidentiary standards, and 
other factors used to apply a treatment limitation with respect to 
medical/surgical benefits and mental health or substance use disorder benefits 
under the Certificate.  
 
15.  Notice. 
Any notice that We give You under this Certificate will be mailed to Your address as it 
appears in Our records or delivered electronically if You consent to electronic delivery.  
If notice is delivered to You electronically, You may also request a copy of the notice 
from Us.  You agree to provide Us with notice of any change of Your address.  If You 
have to give Us any notice, it should be sent by U.S. mail, first class, postage prepaid 
to: Cornell University Office of Student Health Benefits, 395 Pine Tree Rd, Ithaca, NY, 
14850. 
 
16.  Premium Refund. 
We will give any refund of Premiums which are paid by You, if due, to You. 
 
17.  Recovery of Overpayments. 
On occasion, a payment will be made to You when You are not covered, for a service 
that is not Covered, or which is more than is proper.  When this happens, We will 
explain the problem to You and You must return the amount of the overpayment to Us 
within 60 days after receiving notification from Us.  However, We shall not initiate 
overpayment recovery efforts more than 24 months after the original payment was 
made unless We have a reasonable belief of fraud or other intentional misconduct.  
 
18.  Reinstatement after Default. 
If the Student defaults in making any payment this Certificate, the subsequent 
acceptance of payment by Us shall reinstate the Certificate.  
 
 
CU2425-01
102


19.  Right to Develop Guidelines and Administrative Rules.   
We may develop or adopt standards that describe in more detail when We will or will not 
make payments under this Certificate.  Examples of the use of the standards are to 
determine whether: Hospital inpatient care was Medically Necessary; surgery was 
Medically Necessary to treat Your illness or injury; or certain services are skilled care.  
Those standards will not be contrary to the descriptions in this Certificate.  If You have a 
question about the standards that apply to a particular benefit, You may contact Us and 
We will explain the standards or send You a copy of the standards.  We may also 
develop administrative rules pertaining to enrollment and other administrative matters.  
We shall have all the powers necessary or appropriate to enable Us to carry out Our 
duties in connection with the administration of this Certificate. 
 
We review and evaluate new technology according to technology evaluation criteria 
developed by Our medical directors and reviewed by a designated committee, which 
consists of Health Care Professionals from various medical specialties.  Conclusions of 
the committee are incorporated into Our medical policies to establish decision protocols 
for determining whether a service is Medically Necessary, experimental or 
investigational, or included as a covered benefit. 
 
20.  Right to Offset.  
If We make a claim payment to You or on Your behalf in error or You owe Us any 
money, You must repay the amount You owe Us.  Except as otherwise required by law, 
if We owe You a payment for other claims received, We have the right to subtract any 
amount You owe Us from any payment We owe You. 
 
21.  Severability.   
The unenforceability or invalidity of any provision of this Certificate shall not affect the 
validity and enforceability of the remainder of this Certificate. 
 
22.  Significant Change in Circumstances.  
If We are unable to arrange for Covered Services as provided under this Certificate as 
the result of events outside of Our control, We will make a good faith effort to make 
alternative arrangements.  These events would include a major disaster, epidemic, the 
complete or partial destruction of facilities, riot, civil insurrection, disability of a 
significant part of Participating Providers' personnel, or similar causes.  We will make 
reasonable attempts to arrange for Covered Services.  We and Our Participating 
Providers will not be liable for delay, or failure to provide or arrange for Covered 
Services if such failure or delay is caused by such an event. 
 
23.  Subrogation and Reimbursement.   
These paragraphs apply when another party (including any insurer) is, or may be found 
to be, responsible for Your injury, illness or other condition and We have provided 
benefits related to that injury, illness or condition.  As permitted by applicable state law, 
unless preempted by federal law, We may be subrogated to all rights of recovery 
against any such party (including Your own insurance carrier) for the benefits We have 
provided to You under this Certificate.  Subrogation means that We have the right, 
CU2425-01
103


independently of You, to proceed directly against the other party to recover the benefits 
that We have provided. 
 
Subject to applicable state law, unless preempted by federal law, We may have a right 
of reimbursement if You or anyone on Your behalf receives payment from any 
responsible party (including Your own insurance carrier) from any settlement, verdict or 
insurance proceeds, in connection with an injury, illness, or condition for which We 
provided benefits.  Under Section 5-335 of the New York General Obligations Law, Our 
right of recovery does not apply when a settlement is reached between a plaintiff and 
defendant, unless a statutory right of reimbursement exists.  The law also provides that, 
when entering into a settlement, it is presumed that You did not take any action against 
Our rights or violate any contract between You and Us.  The law presumes that the 
settlement between You and the responsible party does not include compensation for 
the cost of health care services for which We provided benefits. 
 
We request that You notify Us within 30 days of the date when any notice is given to 
any party, including an insurance company or attorney, of Your intention to pursue or 
investigate a claim to recover damages or obtain compensation due to injury, illness or 
condition sustained by You for which We have provided benefits.  You must provide all 
information requested by Us or Our representatives including, but not limited to, 
completing and submitting any applications or other forms or statements as We may 
reasonably request. 
 
24.  Third Party Beneficiaries.   
No third party beneficiaries are intended to be created by this Certificate and nothing in 
this Certificate shall confer upon any person or entity other than You or Us any right, 
benefit, or remedy of any nature whatsoever under or by reason of this Certificate.  No 
other party can enforce this Certificate’s provisions or seek any remedy arising out of 
either Our or Your performance or failure to perform any portion of this Certificate, or to 
bring an action or pursuit for the breach of any terms of this Certificate. 
 
25.  Time to Sue.    
No action at law or in equity may be maintained against Us prior to the expiration of 60 
days after written submission of a claim has been furnished to Us as required in this 
Certificate.  You must start any lawsuit against Us under this Certificate within three (3) 
years from the date the claim was required to be filed.   
 
26.  Translation Services.  
Translation services are available under this Certificate for non-English speaking 
Members.  Please contact Us at the number on Your ID card to access these services. 
 
27.  Venue for Legal Action.   
If a dispute arises under this Certificate, it must be resolved in a court located in the 
State of New York.  You agree not to start a lawsuit against Us in a court anywhere 
else.  You also consent to New York State courts having personal jurisdiction over You.  
CU2425-01
104


That means that, when the proper procedures for starting a lawsuit in these courts have 
been followed, the courts can order You to defend any action We bring against You. 
 
28.  Waiver.   
The waiver by any party of any breach of any provision of this Certificate will not be 
construed as a waiver of any subsequent breach of the same or any other provision.  
The failure to exercise any right hereunder will not operate as a waiver of such right. 
 
29.  Who May Change this Certificate.   
This Certificate may not be modified, amended, or changed, except in writing and 
signed by Our Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer (“EVP/CFO) or a 
person designated by the EVP/CFO. No employee, agent, or other person is authorized 
to interpret, amend, modify, or otherwise change this Certificate in a manner that 
expands or limits the scope of coverage, or the conditions of eligibility, enrollment, or 
participation, unless in writing and signed by the EVP/CFO or person designated by the 
EVP/CFO. 
 
30.  Who Receives Payment under this Certificate.   
Payments under this Certificate for services provided by a Participating Provider will be 
made directly by Us to the Provider.  If You receive services from a Non-Participating 
Provider, We reserve the right to pay either You or the Provider.  However, We will 
directly pay a Provider instead of You for Emergency Services, including inpatient 
services following Emergency Department Care, pre-hospital emergency medical 
services, air ambulance services, and surprise bills.   
 
31.  Workers’ Compensation Not Affected.   
The coverage provided under this Certificate is not in lieu of and does not affect any 
requirements for coverage by workers’ compensation insurance or law. 
 
32.  Your Medical Records and Reports.   
In order to provide Your coverage under this Certificate, it may be necessary for Us to 
obtain Your medical records and information from Providers who treated You.  Our 
actions to provide that coverage include processing Your claims, reviewing Grievances, 
Appeals or complaints involving Your care, and quality assurance reviews of Your care, 
whether based on a specific complaint or a routine audit of randomly selected cases.  
By accepting coverage under this Certificate, except as prohibited by state or federal 
law, You automatically give Us or Our designee permission to obtain and use Your 
medical records for those purposes and You authorize each and every Provider who 
renders services to You to: 
• Disclose all facts pertaining to Your care, treatment, and physical condition to 
Us or to a medical, dental, or mental health professional that We may engage 
to assist Us in reviewing a treatment or claim, or in connection with a complaint 
or quality of care review; 
• Render reports pertaining to Your care, treatment, and physical condition to Us, 
or to a medical, dental, or mental health professional that We may engage to 
assist Us in reviewing a treatment or claim; and 
• Permit copying of Your medical records by Us. 
CU2425-01
105


 
We agree to maintain Your medical information in accordance with state and federal 
confidentiality requirements.  However, to the extent permitted under state or federal 
law, You automatically give Us permission to share Your information with the New York 
State Department of Health, quality oversight organizations, and third parties with which 
We contract to assist Us in administering this Certificate, so long as they also agree to 
maintain the information in accordance with state and federal confidentiality 
requirements.  
 
32.  Your Rights and Responsibilities.  
As a Member, You have rights and responsibilities when receiving health care.  As Your 
health care partner, We want to make sure Your rights are respected while providing 
Your health benefits.  You have the right to obtain complete and current information 
concerning a diagnosis, treatment and prognosis from a Physician or other Provider in 
terms You can reasonably understand.  When it is not advisable to give such 
information to You, the information shall be made available to an appropriate person 
acting on Your behalf. 
 
You have the right to receive information from Your Physician or other Provider that You 
need in order to give Your informed consent prior to the start of any procedure or 
treatment.  
 
You have the right to refuse treatment to the extent permitted by law and to be informed 
of the medical consequences of that action. 
 
You have the right to formulate advance directives regarding Your care. 
 
You have the right to access Our Participating Providers. 
 
As a Member, You should also take an active role in Your care.  We encourage You to:  
• Understand Your health problems as well as You can and work with Your 
Providers to make a treatment plan that You all agree on; 
• Follow the treatment plan that You have agreed on with Your doctors or 
Providers; 
• Give Us, Your doctors and other Providers the information needed to help 
You get the care You need and all the benefits You are eligible for under Your 
Certificate.  This may include information about other health insurance 
benefits You have along with Your coverage with Us; and 
• Inform Us if You have any changes to Your name, address or Dependents 
covered under Your Certificate. 
 
For additional information regarding Your rights and responsibilities, visit Our website at 
www.aetnastudenthealth.com.  If You do not have internet access, You can call Us at 
the number on Your ID card to request a copy. 
 
 
CU2425-01
106


SECTION XXVII 
 
Other Covered Services 
 
SHP provides medical evacuation and repatriation services for Students with an 
international visa while You are attending a University outside of Your Home County. 
Expatriates are eligible for medical services while in your Host County or while traveling 
outside your Home Country. 
 
If the condition is a medical emergency, You should go immediately to the nearest 
physician or hospital without delay or call 911. 
 
A. Medical Evacuation and Repatriation Services 
1. Emergency Medical Evacuation 
We will pay Emergency Medical Evacuation Benefits for expenses incurred for 
the medical evacuation of a Member. Benefits are payable if the Member suffers 
an illness or injury; and requires Emergency Medical Evacuation. 
 
We will cover emergency medical evacuation services when: 
• the Provider ordering the Emergency Medical Evacuation certifies the 
severity of the Member’s injury or illness requires an Emergency Medical 
Evacuation; 
• all transportation arrangements made for the Emergency Medical 
Evacuation are by arranged Cornell University Student Health Plan; 
• the charges incurred are recommended by Your Provider and do not 
exceed the usual level of charges for similar transportation, treatment, 
services or supplies in the locality where the expense is incurred; and 
• does not include charges not coverable by this Certificate. 
 
Benefits will not be payable unless coordinated by Cornell University Student 
Health Plan. 
 
2. Repatriation of Remains  
We will pay Repatriation of Remains Benefits for return of a Student’s body to 
their Home Country if they die due to an injury or illness. Covered expenses 
include transporting the remains by the most direct and least costly conveyance 
and route possible.  
 
Benefits will not be payable unless coordinated by Cornell University Student 
Health Plan. 
 
Definitions 
 
Emergency Medical Evacuation: Emergency medically necessary travel services that 
occur while a You are traveling more than 100 miles away from your place of residence 
including: 
CU2425-01
107


• Immediate transportation from the place where You suffer an illness or 
injury resulting in an emergency condition to the nearest Hospital or other 
medical facility where appropriate medical treatment can be obtained; or 
• Transportation to Your Home Country to obtain further or continuing 
medical treatment in a Hospital or other medical facility or to recover after 
suffering an injury or illness. 
 
Expatriate: If You are temporarily traveling or residing outside Your Home Country for 
ninety (90) consecutive calendar days or who spends a total number of more than one 
hundred and eighty days outside of Your Home Country in any plan year. This applies 
only to Students who are not United States citizens. 
 
Home Country: the country or territory as shown on Your passport or the country or 
territory of which You are a permanent resident. This applies only to Student who are 
not United States citizens. 
 
Host Country: with respect to a Student, the country or territory You are visiting or in 
which You are living, which is not Your Home Country. 
 
B. Additional Benefits for Transgender Services 
We will pay for permanent hair removal, including electrolysis, when a Student is 
undergoing sex reassignment surgery. This is not a medically necessary benefit. 
CU2425-01
108


CU2425-02 
 
 
109 
SECTION XXVIII 
 
STUDENT HEALTH PLAN SCHEDULE OF BENEFITS 
Platinum Level, AV 91.11% 
Cornell University 
 
 
COST-SHARING  
 
 
 
 
Medical Deductible 
• 
Individual 
• 
Family 
 
Out-of-Pocket Limit 
• 
Individual 
• 
Family 
 
 
 
Participating Provider  
Member Responsibility 
for Cost-Sharing 
 
 
 
None 
None 
 
 
$4,000 
$8,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Participating 
Provider  
Member Responsibility 
for Cost-Sharing 
 
 
$400 
$800 
 
 
$4,000 
$8,000 
 
See the Cost-Sharing 
Expenses and Allowed 
Amount section of this 
Certificate for a 
description of how We 
calculate the Allowed 
Amount. 
 
Any charges of a Non- 
Participating Provider that 
are in excess of the 
Allowed Amount do not 
apply towards the 
Deductible or Out-of- 
Pocket Limit. You must 
pay the amount of the 
Non-Participating 
Provider’s charge that 
exceeds Our Allowed 
Amount. 
 
OFFICE VISITS 
Participating Provider 
Member Responsibility 
for Cost-Sharing 
Non-Participating 
Provider Member 
Responsibility for Cost-
Sharing 
 
Limits 
Primary Care Office Visits  
(or Home Visits) 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 
Specialist Office Visits  
(or Home Visits) 
$25 Copayment 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible  
See benefit 
for description 
G/L Code :
OU :
Cost :
Department:
        APPROVED
STATE OF NEW YORK
              APPROVED
     STATE OF NEW YORK
             APPROVED
     STATE OF NEW YORK
Date:
       SUPERINTENDENT
    BENJAMIN M. LAWSKY
NYS DEPARTMENT OF 
 
NYS DEPARTMENT OF
 FINANCIAL SERVICES
SHIRIN EMAMI
SHIRIN EMAMI
ACTING SUPERINTENDENT
SHIRIN EMAMI
Maria T. Vullo
MARIA T. VULLO
LINDA A. LACEWELL
SUPERINTENDENT
ADRIENNE A. HARRIS
06/04/2024


CU2425-02 
 
 
110 
PREVENTIVE CARE 
Participating Provider 
Member Responsibility 
for Cost-Sharing 
Non-Participating 
Provider Member 
Responsibility for Cost-
Sharing 
Limits 
Well Child Visits and 
Immunizations* 
 
Adult Annual Physical 
Examinations* 
 
Adult Immunizations* 
 
 
Routine Gynecological 
Services/Well Woman 
Exams* 
 
Mammograms, Screening 
and Diagnostic Imaging 
for the Detection of Breast 
Cancer 
 
Sterilization Procedures 
for Women* 
 
Vasectomy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bone Density Testing 
 
 
Screening for Prostate 
Cancer  
 
Screening for Colon 
Cancer 
 
All other preventive 
services required by 
USPSTF and HRSA. 
 
*When preventive services 
are not provided in 
accordance with the 
comprehensive guidelines 
Covered in full 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
Use Cost-Sharing for 
appropriate service 
(Surgical Services; 
Anesthesia Services; 
Ambulatory Surgical 
Center Facility Fee; 
Outpatient Hospital 
Surgery Facility Charge) 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
 
Use Cost-Sharing for 
appropriate service 
(Primary Care Office Visit; 
Specialist Office Visit; 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
See benefit 
for description 


CU2425-02 
 
 
111 
supported by USPSTF 
and HRSA. 
Diagnostic Radiology 
Services; Laboratory 
Procedures and 
Diagnostic Testing)  
 
EMERGENCY CARE 
Participating Provider 
Member Responsibility 
for Cost-Sharing 
Non-Participating 
Provider Member 
Responsibility for Cost-
Sharing 
Limits 
Pre-Hospital Emergency 
Medical Services  
(Ambulance Services) 
Covered in full 
Covered in full 
See benefit 
for description 
Non-Emergency 
Ambulance Services 
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
Covered in full 
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
Covered in full 
  
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
See benefit 
for description 
Emergency Department  
 
 
Copayment waived if 
admitted to Hospital 
$100 Copayment  
 
 
Health care forensic 
examinations performed 
under Public Health Law § 
2805-I are not subject to 
Copayment;  
$100 Copayment not 
subject to Deductible 
 
Health care forensic 
examinations performed 
under Public Health Law § 
2805-I are not subject to 
Copayment; 
See benefit 
for description 
Urgent Care Center   
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required for Out-of-
Network Urgent Care 
 
$50 Copayment 
$50 Copayment not 
subject to Deductible  
 
Preauthorization 
Required for In-Network 
Cost Share 
See benefit 
for description 
PROFESSIONAL 
SERVICES and 
OUTPATIENT CARE 
Participating Provider 
Member Responsibility 
for Cost-Sharing 
Non-Participating 
Provider Member 
Responsibility for Cost-
Sharing 
Limits 
Acupuncture 
30% Coinsurance 
30% Coinsurance after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 
Advanced Imaging 
Services 
 
Performed in a Specialist 
Office 
 
Performed in a 
Freestanding Radiology 
Facility  
 
Performed as Outpatient 
Hospital Services  
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance after 
Deductible 
 
 
30% Coinsurance after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 


CU2425-02 
 
 
112 
Allergy Testing and 
Treatment 
 
Performed in a PCP Office  
 
 
Performed in a Specialist 
Office 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance after 
Deductible 
 
See benefit 
for description  
Ambulatory Surgical 
Center Facility Fee 
 
10% Coinsurance 
30% Coinsurance after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description  
Anesthesia Services  
(all settings) 
 
10% Coinsurance 
30% Coinsurance after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 
Cardiac and Pulmonary 
Rehabilitation 
 
Performed in a Specialist 
Office  
 
Performed as Outpatient 
Hospital Services 
 
Performed as Inpatient 
Hospital Services  
 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
Included as part of 
inpatient Hospital service 
Cost-Sharing 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance after 
Deductible 
 
Included as part of 
inpatient Hospital service 
Cost-Sharing 
See benefit 
for description 
 
Chemotherapy and 
Immunotherapy (Infusions) 
 
Administration 
• Performed in a PCP 
Office  
 
• Performed in a 
Specialist Office  
 
• Performed as 
Outpatient Hospital 
Services 
 
• Performed at Home 
 
 
Chemotherapy and 
Immunotherapy 
Medications 
 
 
 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description  
Chiropractic Services 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
See benefit 
for description 


CU2425-02 
 
 
113 
Clinical Trials 
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
 
Use Cost-Sharing for 
appropriate service  
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
Use Cost-Sharing for 
appropriate service  
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
See benefit 
for description 
Diagnostic Testing  
 
Performed in a PCP Office  
 
 
Performed in a Specialist 
Office  
 
Performed as Outpatient 
Hospital Services 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
deductible 
 
See benefit 
for description 
Dialysis 
 
Performed in a PCP Office  
 
 
Performed in a Specialist 
Office 
 
 
Performed in a 
Freestanding Center  
 
 
Performed as Outpatient 
Hospital Services 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
deductible 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
deductible 
 
See benefit 
for description 
Habilitation Services  
(Physical Therapy, 
Occupational Therapy or 
Speech Therapy) 
10% Coinsurance  
30% Coinsurance, after 
deductible 
 
60 visits per 
condition, per 
Plan Year  
combined 
therapies 
Home Health Care  
$25 Copayment 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
deductible 
 
40 visits per 
Plan Year 
Infertility Services 
Use Cost-Sharing for 
appropriate service (Office 
Visit; Diagnostic 
Radiology Services; 
Surgery; Laboratory & 
Diagnostic Procedures) 
Use Cost-Sharing for 
appropriate service (Office 
Visit; Diagnostic 
Radiology Services; 
Surgery; Laboratory & 
Diagnostic Procedures) 
 
See benefit 
for description  
 
 


CU2425-02 
 
 
114 
Infusion Therapy  
 
Administration 
• Performed in a PCP 
Office  
 
• Performed in 
Specialist Office  
 
• Performed as 
Outpatient Hospital 
Services 
 
• Home Infusion 
Therapy  
 
Infusion Therapy 
Medication 
 
 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
deductible 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
deductible 
 
See benefit 
for description 
 
Home 
infusion 
counts toward 
home health 
care visit 
limits 
Inpatient Medical Visits 
10% Coinsurance 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 
 
Interruption of Pregnancy 
 
Abortion Services 
 
 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
See benefit 
for description 
 
Laboratory Procedures 
 
Performed in a PCP Office 
 
 
Performed in a Specialist 
Office 
 
Performed in a 
Freestanding Laboratory 
Facility  
 
Performed as Outpatient 
Hospital Services  
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 
Maternity and Newborn 
Care 
  
Prenatal Care 
• Prenatal Care 
provided in 
accordance with the 
comprehensive 
 
 
 
  
Covered in full 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
See benefit 
for description 
 
 
 
 
 
 


CU2425-02 
 
 
115 
guidelines supported 
by USPSTF and 
HRSA 
 
• Prenatal Care that is 
not provided in 
accordance with the 
comprehensive 
guidelines supported 
by USPSTF and 
HRSA 
 
 
 
 
Inpatient Hospital Services 
and Birthing Center  
 
 
Physician and Midwife 
Services for Delivery  
 
 
Breastfeeding Support, 
Counseling and Supplies, 
Including Breast Pumps 
 
 
Postnatal Care 
 
 
 
 
Use Cost-Sharing for 
appropriate service 
(Primary Care Office Visit, 
Specialist Office Visit, 
Diagnostic Radiology 
Services, Laboratory 
Procedures and 
Diagnostic Testing) 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance per 
admission  
 
 
10% Coinsurance per 
admission  
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
 
 
Use Cost-Sharing for 
appropriate service 
(Primary Care Office Visit, 
Specialist Office Visit, 
Diagnostic Radiology 
Services, Laboratory 
Procedures and 
Diagnostic Testing) 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One (1) home 
care visit is 
covered at no 
Cost-Sharing 
if mother is 
discharged 
from Hospital 
early 
 
Covered for 
duration of 
breast 
feeding  
 
Outpatient Hospital 
Surgery Facility Charge 
10% Coinsurance 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 
 
Preadmission Testing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Use Cost-Sharing for 
appropriate service 
(Diagnostic Radiology 
Services; Laboratory 
Procedures and 
Diagnostic Testing] 
Use Cost-Sharing for 
appropriate service 
(Diagnostic Radiology 
Services; Laboratory 
Procedures and 
Diagnostic Testing) 
See benefit 
for description 
Prescription Drugs 
Administered in Office or 
Outpatient Facilities 
 
Administration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See benefit 
for description 


CU2425-02 
 
 
116 
• 
Performed in a 
PCP Office 
 
• 
Performed in 
Specialist Office 
 
• 
Performed in 
Outpatient 
Facilities 
 
Prescription Drug Cost-
Sharing 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
 
Covered in full 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
Diagnostic Radiology 
Services  
 
• 
Performed in a PCP 
Office  
 
• 
Performed in a 
Specialist Office 
 
• 
Performed in a 
Freestanding 
Radiology Facility  
 
• 
Performed as 
Outpatient Hospital 
Services 
 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
See benefit 
for description 
Therapeutic Radiology 
Services 
 
Performed in a Specialist 
Office 
 
Performed in a 
Freestanding Radiology 
Facility  
 
Performed as Outpatient 
Hospital Services 
 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 
 
Rehabilitation Services 
(Physical Therapy, 
Occupational Therapy or 
Speech Therapy) 
10% Coinsurance 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
60 visits per 
condition, per 
Plan Year 
combined 
therapies 
 
 


CU2425-02 
 
 
117 
Retail Health Clinic Care 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 
Second Opinions on the 
Diagnosis of Cancer,  
Surgery and Other 
10% Coinsurance 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
Second opinions on 
diagnosis of cancer are 
Covered at participating 
Cost-Sharing for non-
participating Specialist 
 
See benefit 
for description 
 
 
Surgical Services  
(including Oral Surgery; 
Reconstructive Breast 
Surgery; Other 
Reconstructive and 
Corrective Surgery; and 
Transplants) 
 
Inpatient Hospital Surgery 
 
 
Outpatient Hospital 
Surgery 
 
 
Surgery Performed at an 
Ambulatory Surgical 
Center 
 
Office Surgery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
See benefit 
for description 
 
 
 
 
 
All 
transplants 
must be 
performed at 
designated 
Facilities 
Telemedicine Program 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 
 
 
 


CU2425-02 
 
 
118 
ADDITIONAL SERVICES, 
EQUIPMENT and 
DEVICES 
Participating Provider 
Member Responsibility 
for Cost-Sharing 
Non-Participating 
Provider Member 
Responsibility for Cost-
Sharing 
Limits 
Diabetic Equipment, 
Supplies and Self-
Management Education 
 
• 
Diabetic Equipment, 
and Supplies 
 
• 
Diabetic Insulin (30-
day supply) 
 
 
 
• 
Oral anti-diabetic 
agents and injectable 
anti-diabetic agents 
(30-day supply) 
 
• 
Diabetic Education 
 
 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
See the Prescription Drug 
Cost-Sharing, but not 
more than $100 for a 30-
day supply of insulin. 
 
See the Prescription Drug 
Cost-Sharing 
 
 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance 
 
 
See the Prescription Drug 
Cost-Sharing 
 
 
 
See the Prescription Drug 
Cost-Sharing 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance 
 
See benefit 
for description 
 
 
Durable Medical 
Equipment and Braces 
10% Coinsurance 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 
 
External Hearing Aids 
 
• 
Prescription Hearing 
Aids 
 
 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
Single 
purchase 
once every 
three (3) 
years 
Cochlear Implants 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
One (1) per 
ear per time 
Covered 
Hospice Care 
 
• 
Inpatient 
 
 
• 
Outpatient 
 
 
 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
210 days per 
Plan Year 
 
Five (5) visits 
for family 
bereavement 
counseling  
Medical Supplies 
10% Coinsurance 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 
 
 
 


CU2425-02 
 
 
119 
Prosthetic Devices 
 
External 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internal 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
 
One (1) 
prosthetic 
device, per 
limb, per plan 
year, with 
coverage for 
repairs and 
replacements 
 
Unlimited; 
See benefit 
for description 
 
INPATIENT SERVICES 
and FACILITIES  
Participating Provider 
Member Responsibility 
for Cost-Sharing 
Non-Participating 
Provider Member 
Responsibility for Cost-
Sharing 
 
Limits 
Autologous Blood Banking 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 
 
Inpatient Hospital for a 
Continuous Confinement 
(including an Inpatient 
Stay for Mastectomy Care, 
Cardiac and Pulmonary 
Rehabilitation, and End of 
Life Care)  
 
Preauthorization 
Required.  
 
However, Preauthorization 
is not required for 
emergency admissions or 
services provided in a 
neonatal intensive care 
unit of a Hospital certified 
pursuant to Article 28 of 
the Public Health Law. 
 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required.  
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required.  
See benefit 
for description 
Observation Stay 
10% Coinsurance 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 


CU2425-02 
 
 
120 
Skilled Nursing Facility 
(including Cardiac and 
Pulmonary Rehabilitation) 
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
200 days per 
Plan Year 
Inpatient Habilitation 
Services (Physical Speech 
and Occupational 
Therapy) 
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
 
60 days per 
Plan Year 
combined 
therapies 
Inpatient Rehabilitation 
Services  
(Physical, Speech and 
Occupational Therapy)  
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required 
 
60 days per  
Plan Year 
combined 
therapies 
 
Speech and 
physical 
therapy are 
only Covered 
following a 
Hospital stay 
or surgery 
 
MENTAL HEALTH and 
SUBSTANCE USE 
DISORDER SERVICES 
Participating Provider 
Member Responsibility 
for Cost-Sharing 
Non-Participating 
Provider Member 
Responsibility for Cost-
Sharing 
Limits 
Inpatient Mental Health 
Care for a continuous 
confinement when in a 
Hospital (including 
Residential Treatment)  
 
Preauthorization 
Required.  However, 
Preauthorization is not 
required for emergency 
admissions or for 
admissions at 
Participating OMH-
licensed Facilities for 
Members under 18. 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
 
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required.  However, 
Preauthorization is not 
required for emergency 
admissions or for 
admissions at 
Participating OMH-
licensed Facilities for 
Members under 18. 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required.  However, 
Preauthorization is not 
required for emergency 
admissions or for 
admissions. 
See benefit 
for description 
Outpatient Mental Health 
Care  
(including Partial 
Hospitalization and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See benefit 
for description 
 


CU2425-02 
 
 
121 
Intensive Outpatient 
Program Services) 
 
• 
Office Visits 
 
• 
Outpatient Services 
provided in a Facility 
licensed, certified, or 
otherwise authorized 
by OMH 
 
• 
All Other Outpatient 
Services 
 
 
 
 
$10 Copayment 
 
$25 Copayment 
 
 
 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
ABA Treatment for Autism 
Spectrum Disorder 
 
Covered in full 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 
Assistive Communication 
Devices for Autism 
Spectrum Disorder 
 
Covered in full 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 
Inpatient Substance Use 
Services for a continuous 
confinement when in a 
Hospital (including 
Residential Treatment) 
 
Preauthorization 
Required.  However, 
Preauthorization is Not 
Required for Emergency 
Admissions or for 
Participating OASAS-
certified Facilities. 
10% Coinsurance  
 
 
 
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required.  However, 
Preauthorization is Not 
Required for Emergency 
Admissions or for 
Participating OASAS-
certified Facilities. 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
 
 
Preauthorization 
Required.  However, 
Preauthorization is Not 
Required for Emergency 
Admissions. 
See benefit 
for description 
Outpatient Substance Use 
Services (including Partial 
Hospitalization, Intensive 
Outpatient Program 
Services, and Medication 
Assisted Treatment) 
• Office Visits 
 
 
• Opioid Treatment 
Programs 
 
• All Other Outpatient 
Services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$10 Copayment 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
10% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
Unlimited; Up 
to 20 visits 
per Plan Year 
may be used 
for family 
counseling 


CU2425-02 
 
 
122 
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS 
 
*Certain Prescription 
Drugs are not subject to 
Cost-Sharing when 
provided in accordance 
with the comprehensive 
guidelines supported by 
HRSA or if the item or 
service has an “A” or “B” 
rating from the USPSTF. 
 
Participating Provider 
Member Responsibility 
for Cost-Sharing 
Non-Participating 
Provider Member 
Responsibility for Cost-
Sharing 
Limits 
Retail Pharmacy 
 
 
 
30-day supply 
 
Generic (Tier 1) 
 
 
Preferred (Tier 2) 
 
 
Non-Preferred (Tier 3) 
 
 
Preauthorization is not 
required for a Covered 
Prescription Drug used to 
treat a substance use 
disorder, including a 
Prescription Drug to 
manage opioid withdrawal 
and/or stabilization and for 
opioid overdose reversal.  
 
 
 
$12 Copayment 
 
 
$40 Copayment 
 
 
$60 Copayment 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
See benefit 
for description 
 
Compounded 
drugs over 
$200 require 
Preauthorizat-
ion 
Up to a 90-day supply for 
Maintenance Drugs  
 
Generic (Tier 1) 
 
 
Preferred (Tier 2) 
 
 
Non-Preferred (Tier 3) 
 
 
 
 
 
$36 Copayment 
 
 
$120 Copayment 
 
 
$180 Copayment 
 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
See benefit 
for description 
Enteral Formulas 
 
Generic (Tier 1) 
 
 
 
$12 Copayment 
 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
See benefit 
for description 


CU2425-02 
 
 
123 
 
Preferred (Tier 2) 
 
 
Non-Preferred (Tier 3) 
 
 
$40 Copayment 
 
 
$60 Copayment 
 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
30% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
WELLNESS BENEFITS 
Participating Provider 
Member Responsibility 
for Cost-Sharing 
Non-Participating 
Provider Member 
Responsibility for Cost-
Sharing 
 
Gym Reimbursement 
Up to $200 per six (6) 
month period; up to an 
additional $100 per six (6) 
month period for Spouse. 
Up to $200 per six (6) 
month period; up to an 
additional $100 per six (6) 
month period for Spouse. 
Up to $200 
per six (6) 
month period; 
up to an 
additional 
$100 per six 
(6) month 
period for 
Spouse. 
 
PEDIATRIC DENTAL and 
VISION CARE 
Participating Provider 
Member Responsibility 
for Cost-Sharing 
Non-Participating 
Provider Member 
Responsibility for Cost-
Sharing 
 
Limits 
Pediatric Dental Care 
 
• 
Preventive Dental 
Care 
 
 
• 
Routine Dental Care 
 
 
 
• 
Major Dental Care 
(Oral Surgery, 
Endodontics, 
Periodontics and 
Prosthodontics) 
 
• 
Orthodontics 
 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
50% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
 
50% Coinsurance 
 
 
 
 
 
50% Coinsurance 
 
 
50% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
50% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
 
50% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
 
 
 
50% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
One (1) 
dental exam 
and cleaning 
per six (6)-
month period 
 
Full mouth x-
rays or 
panoramic x-
rays at 36 
month 
intervals and 
bitewing x-
rays at  six (6) 
month 
intervals 
Pediatric Vision Care 
 
• 
Exams 
 
 
• 
Lenses and Frames 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
50% Coinsurance 
 
 
50% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
50% Coinsurance, after 
One (1) exam 
per 12-month 
period  
 
One (1)  
prescribed 


CU2425-02 
 
 
124 
 
 
• 
Contact Lenses 
 
 
 
 
50% Coinsurance 
Deductible 
 
50% Coinsurance, after 
Deductible 
 
lenses and 
frames per 
12-month 
period 
Other Covered Services 
 
Emergency Medical 
Evacuation 
 
Repatriation of Remains 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
See benefit 
for 
description 
 
Benefit 
maximum is 
$25,000 
Additional Benefits for 
Transgender Services 
 
Permanent Hair 
removal including 
electrolysis 
 
 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
 
 
Covered in full 
 
 
Benefit 
maximum is 
$3,000 
 
All in-network Preauthorization requests are the responsibility of Your Participating Provider.  You will 
not be penalized for a Participating Provider’s failure to obtain a required Preauthorization.  However, if 
services are not covered under the Certificate, You will be responsible for the full cost of the services. 
